Titulo: Governor's Address at SEVENTY-NINTH ORDINARY GENERAL MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS OF THE BANK, 24 AUGUST 1999
Data: 1999-08-24
Palestrante (estimado): None
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/governor's-address-to-shareholders/1999/17
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/governor%27s-address-to-shareholders/1999/17/abridged-english-version.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Abridged English Version
ABRIDGED ACTUAL ADDRESS BY MR T.T. MBOWENI,
GOVERNOR OF THE SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK,
AT THE SEVENTY-NINTH ORDINARY GENERAL MEETING OF
SHAREHOLDERS OF THE BANK, 24 AUGUST 1999
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
INTRODUCTION
As has been shown in the presentation on economic conditions, the South African economy recovered
remarkably from the contagion effect of the financial turbulence in Asia and Russia. A substantial decline in
the holdings of South African bonds by non-residents and the deterioration in the current account of the
balance of payments, forced the authorities to pursue restrictive policy measures. This proved effective and
tentative signs of a return to financial stability already began to appear in the last few months of 1998.
The recovery of the financial sector was, however, attained at the cost of lower economic growth because
of the restrictive measures that were applied, as well as the impact of a slowdown in international economic
activity in many parts of the world and a slump in international commodity prices. The low production growth
in the past year aggravated the unemployment problem and contributed to other negative social effects.
Although there are still risks and uncertainties in the world economy, conditions seem to be far better now
than they were during 1998. Domestically the economy is poised for higher growth in production provided
that it is not again affected by setbacks in other countries.
THE FINANCIAL TURBULENCE AND MONETARY POLICY
The brunt of the adjustment process in 1998 fell on monetary policy, as it takes a long time to make
changes in fiscal and other policy measures. The strains that developed in the foreign exchange market in
1998 caused the exchange rate of the rand and domestic interest rates to adjust automatically to the
changed supply of and demand for foreign exchange and the impact of these developments on bank
liquidity. In these volatile and uncertain circumstances, the monetary authorities could only influence the
speed of the adjustments required by the market.
The Reserve Bank's response was to underprovide in the liquidity requirement of the banks and to intervene
in the foreign exchange market so that financial stability could be restored at the least cost in terms of
inflation and economic growth, and employment losses. As a result, the repo rate moved sharply upwards
by about 7 percentage points from the beginning of May to 21,85 per cent on 28 August 1998. The
accommodation system was made more effective to cope with the crisis by phasing in a wider spread from
1 to 20 percentage points between the repo rate and the marginal lending rate. These measures led to
corresponding steep increases in other short-term interest rates.
In tandem with the rise in interest rates, the Reserve Bank at first intervened heavily in the foreign
exchange market in May and June 1998 in an attempt to create some order in a market that had become
extremely sensitive to any negative news or rumours. In view of the large risks and potential costs
associated with a net open exposure, the Reserve Bank stopped using this intervention technique when it
became apparent that the contagion impact of the emerging-markets' crisis would be more severe and
longer lasting than originally expected. This decision was validated when it became known that highly
leveraged funds had built up speculative positions against the rand through forward foreign exchange
transactions. Later, when these leveraged funds incurred losses in emerging markets and were forced to
buy back their short rand positions, these transactions contributed to the retracing of some of the rand's
earlier losses.
Page 1
Abridged English Version
Although financial conditions became more stable from the fourth quarter of 1998, general nervousness
continued to prevail among international investors, and they withdrew funds from emerging-market
economies whenever there were signs of any pressure on exchange rates. In these circumstances, the
Reserve Bank deemed it prudent to guide the repo and other money market interest rates gradually down to
lower levels. With brief interruptions, the repo rate then moved lower from its upper turning point of 21,85
per cent on 28 August 1998 to 13,65 per cent on 31 July 1999. Over the same period, the net open foreign
currency position of the Reserve Bank was reduced by US$5,6 billion to US$17,5 billion at the end of July
1999.
Despite the initial wide fluctuations in the repo rate, the repo-based accommodation system that the
Reserve Bank had introduced in March 1998 is proving of considerable value in general and during periods
of instability in financial markets in particular. Most of the difficulties encountered shortly after the
implementation of the system were due to general nervousness in the market and teething problems. The
system was flexible enough to be adjusted easily to solve these problems. Changes to enhance the
efficiency of the repo system included the shortening of maturities, the introduction of "square-off auctions"
at the end of the daily clearing period, administrative adjustments to the management of cash reserves and
a refinement of the signalling procedures of the Reserve Bank. After these changes had been made,
short-term interest rates became more flexible without being too volatile or too slow in reacting to signals.
THE WAY FORWARD
The liberalisation and international integration of financial services make it imperative for South Africa to
bring domestic inflation in step with that of the rest of the world and to maintain sound and efficient financial
institutions and markets. If these goals are not achieved, the economy could be subjected to sudden
reversals in international capital flows, exchange rate instability and volatile interest rates. The thrust of
monetary policy in these circumstances should therefore be to establish and maintain financial stability, i.e.
stability of prices, financial institutions and financial markets.
This does not mean that monetary policy ignores other objectives of economic policy, such as economic
growth, employment creation and improved social conditions in the country. On the contrary, we regard
financial stability as a precondition for balanced and sustainable economic growth and improved living
conditions, because it improves the efficiency of the pricing system and economic decision-making;
enhances the efficiency of financial intermediation; minimises the inflation risk premium in long-term
interest rates; reduces the incentive to hedge against inflation; promotes a more equitable distribution of
wealth and income; and facilitates investment decision-making. A monetary policy that maintains financial
stability in a credible and lasting way will accordingly make the best overall contribution to improving
economic growth, employment and living standards.
A market-oriented strategy will be followed to achieve this overriding goal of monetary policy because
financial institutions and markets function best in the national interest if they are competitive, active and
liquid, and if interest rates and exchange rates are flexible. The Reserve Bank will accordingly continue to
discuss with government the relaxation of exchange controls when underlying conditions are conducive to
taking such steps. The eventual removal of exchange control restrictions should contribute towards
dismantling the oversold forward book and reducing the net open foreign currency position. Once residents
have accumulated large amounts of foreign assets, they could use these assets to counterbalance
short-term currency volatility if they perceive this to be an opportunity of profiting from a temporary
undervaluation of the exchange rate.
In pursuit of the primary objective of price stability it is essential, as stated in the Constitution, that the
Reserve Bank performs its functions independently and without fear, favour or prejudice. The Bank will
maintain an attitude of economic-professional objectivity, but will, of course, at the same time be
accountable to Parliament and the general public for its actions. Transparency in the interpretation of
economic data and the monetary policy stance will be promoted further. Regular reporting on economic
conditions and Reserve Bank operations to Parliament and the general public will receive high priority.
Although the Bank will strive to achieve closer co-operation and co-ordination with the authorities
responsible for policy decisions in other macroeconomic and microeconomic fields, the autonomy of the
Page 2
Abridged English Version
Bank will be preserved. There are structural deficiencies in the economy which impair saving, investment,
production growth and employment creation, and increase the level of real interest rates. A number of
initiatives announced by the President at the opening of Parliament are aimed at easing these supply-side
constraints. The implementation of these structural changes could create further scope for lower nominal
and real interest rates. Closer co-operation and co-ordination between the Reserve Bank and other national
official bodies may expedite this process.
The Southern African Development Community (SADC) provides an opportunity for member states to face
jointly the challenges of global financial integration. Considerable progress has been made over almost four
years in promoting interaction in Southern Africa through the Committee of Central Bank Governors of the
SADC. The South African Reserve Bank will continue to promote the effective co-operation and integration
of the financial systems and markets of Southern Africa. For the time being this will be done informally
before attempting to achieve officially-sanctioned harmonisation and integration of financial arrangements.
In applying monetary policy in South Africa it is advisable to move away from the "eclectic" or informal
inflation-targeting framework to formal inflation targeting. The eclectic monetary policy approach has been a
useful framework for containing inflation, but at times it created uncertainties about Reserve Bank
decisions and actions which were perceived as being in conflict with intermediate objectives. The
guidelines on the growth in money supply and bank credit extension have constantly been breached in
recent years as a result of financial deepening. To the extent that a formal or explicit inflation-targeting
framework would be more transparent than the previous framework, it ought to allay some of these
uncertainties.
With the adoption of inflation targeting, it will become clear that the containment of inflation is not solely a
Reserve Bank responsibility. Inflation targets should be set jointly by the Reserve Bank and government.
Inflation targeting will be more effective when economic policies are well co-ordinated. Before inflation
targeting is introduced, this co-ordination should be clearly spelled out and all stakeholders must be
consulted, including business and the trade union movement. We are convinced that the government will
ensure that the policy measures are properly co-ordinated.
Our considered view is that a policy target agreement should be drawn up that would be signed by the
Minister of Finance and the Governor of the Reserve Bank to define precisely the co-ordinated effort
needed to contain inflation in pursuit of the broader economic objectives of sustainable high economic
growth and employment creation. In this agreement the instrumental independence of the Reserve Bank
must be guaranteed. This stipulation and the rest of the agreement will, of course, have to be ratified by
Parliament.
Inflation targeting is a complicated monetary policy framework that requires careful preparations before an
announcement is made to apply it in practice. To facilitate the implementation of inflation targeting, the
Bank is currently revising and reorganising the functions of the Economics Department, now renamed the
Research Department. As the new name implies, the activities of the department will concentrate on
research, i.e. analysing monetary issues and co-ordinating research in the Bank. Although an important part
of the Research Department's work will still be devoted to the compilation of economic statistics that can
be used in economic analysis, greater attention will henceforth be given to monetary policy assessment,
econometric modelling, international economic developments, international relations, and labour and social
research.
The Research Department is developing the technical support systems that are essential for the
implementation of an inflation-targeting framework, namely the development of additional and more
sophisticated inflation-forecasting models; the investigation of the transmission mechanism between
changes in policy instruments and inflation; and the design and implementation of a survey-based
assessment of inflation expectations.
Although these steps are necessary for the implementation of inflation targeting, this new framework should
not in any significant way affect the conduct of monetary policy. Policy actions will still be guided by a
medium-term inflation outlook, albeit in a more transparent manner. In order to arrive at an inflation outlook,
the Bank will continue to monitor a wide range of economic indicators, including developments in money
Page 3
Abridged English Version
supply and bank credit extension. In this new framework the Bank's main operational instrument will
continue to be the repo mechanism. The same fine-tuning and structural operational instruments will be
used to influence interest rates, and the level of the exchange rate of the rand will be determined primarily
by the impact of these actions on the supply of and demand for foreign exchange.
The Reserve Bank will also continue to monitor financial conditions carefully as part of its objective to
maintain financial stability. Where unavoidable pressures do arise in the financial system, the Bank may
have to carefully contain them directly as "lender of last resort". The lender-of-last-resort facility will not,
however, automatically be made available to all banks in distress, but only in cases where the failure of a
bank would pose a serious threat to the financial system as a whole. Criteria will be established to specify
the exit strategy of the Reserve Bank. A deposit-insurance scheme is being developed to cover retail
depositors. This scheme could provide more latitude in deciding whether to close an ailing bank, without the
concern that depositors in financially healthy banks may lose confidence in the banking system as a whole.
Sound financial supervision is a prerequisite for financial stability and warranted the debate during the past
year on the feasibility of establishing a single financial regulatory authority in South Africa. Most countries
have securities commissions responsible for the regulation of investment services and in many countries
there is still a separation of banking and insurance supervision. Current opinion in South Africa is influenced
strongly by recent developments in the United Kingdom and Australia where banking supervision has been
moved out of the central bank into a single financial regulator.
There are convincing arguments both for and against a single financial regulator. Arguments for such a
single regulator include issues such as the bluring of functional dividing lines between different institutions,
the development of financial conglomerates, the exploitation of gaps in financial regulation and the
achievement of economies of scale and a uniform style of regulation. Arguments for the retention of bank
supervision as a Reserve Bank function are based on the characteristics of banking, the special
relationships between the Bank and the banking sector, the high systemic risks in banking, the importance
of a healthy banking system for effective monetary policy and the Bank's ability to compete for scarce
human resources. It is important that all these arguments be carefully considered by government to find an
appropriate approach to this issue that can continue to assist in the execution of monetary policy.
A well-organised decision-making process is another important factor in the conduct of monetary policy. All
monetary policy decisions are currently made by the Governors' Committee (consisting of the Governor and
deputy governors), while the Monetary Policy Implementation Committee (MPIC) is responsible for carrying
out monetary policy. Although this decision-making process works well, monetary policy issues demand
more attention. It has therefore been decided to create a Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) for the
formulation of monetary policy. The MPC will consist of the Governor and deputy governors as voting
members and senior officials of the Bank as non-voting members.
The MPC will consider and evaluate the state of the economy, the current stance of monetary policy and
the operational procedures in the conduct of monetary policy, and formulate the changes deemed necessary
in monetary policy and operational procedures. The final decision-making power on monetary policy matters
will nevertheless still vest in the Governors' Committee. The MPIC will continue to function as in the past.
In order to provide opportunities for public involvement in the monetary policy decision-making process, it
has also been decided to create a Monetary Policy Forum (MPF). The Governor of the Reserve Bank will
chair the MPF, and representatives of private business enterprises, labour and other interested institutions
and organisations will be invited to participate in the meetings of the MPF. The MPF will meet twice a year
to discuss macroeconomic developments and monetary policy issues.
INTERNAL ADMINISTRATION OF THE BANK
The internal decision-making process of the Reserve Bank will be changed in the coming year. In addition
to the existing Currency, Payment and Financial Systems Committee and the Management Committee, a
Budget Committee will be formed. The Budget Committee will have the authority to compile and monitor the
implementation of the Bank's annual budget. Through a Subcommittee on Procurement, the Budget
Committee will also be responsible for the procurement, management and control of supplies, services and
Page 4
Abridged English Version
assets of the Bank.
In a further attempt to achieve greater transparency, the Bank has decided to establish a fully-fledged
Media Office. This office will be primarily responsible for focusing on external communication, thus
assisting the media, national and provincial legislative structures and the general public to gain a better
understanding of the Bank's policies, decisions and activities.
During the past year, considerable progress has been made with a number of other administrative projects
in the Reserve Bank. These projects included the certification of year 2000 compliance of information
technology systems; enhancing national payment system principles, practices and arrangements; improving
the national notes and coin management distribution system; the completion of comprehensive
recalculations of national accounts and balance of payments statistics; and the promotion of training in the
Bank as well as in the SADC region.
A beginning has also been made in drawing up a human resources plan which will deal with progressive
employment equity in the workplace by promoting equal opportunities and fair treatment. The plan will
propose the implementation of affirmative action measures to redress the disadvantages of designated
groups to ensure their equitable representation in all occupational categories and levels of the workforce. A
renewed focus will be placed on recruiting from the target group and enhancing the skills profile through
development and monitoring. This plan will, however, be put into effect in a manner that will ensure that the
institutional memory does not drop below the critical level required for national and international excellence.
To achieve these goals, a Subcommittee on Human Resources will be established under the auspices of
the Management Committee to oversee the execution of the human resources plan.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Events over the past year illustrate that the thrust of monetary policy in an integrated financial world should
clearly be to pursue financial stability. Although such a policy stance does not provide unconditional
protection against volatile international capital movements, it improves the country's ability to withstand
international financial turbulence. When international financial disruptions affect the South African economy,
adjustments will inevitably have to be made to the exchange rate of the rand, domestic liquidity and interest
rates. The objective of the monetary authorities should not be to resist such changes, but rather to ease the
adjustment process by pursuing consistent and transparent policy measures. Financial stability is a
precondition for sustained economic growth and employment creation.
The changes to the monetary policy framework and the monetary policy decision-making process that are
proposed in this address should assist the authorities in this difficult task. Inflation targeting is no panacea,
but it should help to anchor inflation expectations and minimise the inevitable, but short-term, social and
economic cost of achieving price stability. A more transparent decision-making process will further assist in
reaching this goal.
In conclusion, I wish to thank the President and Deputy President of the Republic for their support and
appreciation with regard to the functions of the South African Reserve Bank and its governors. I further
wish to thank Mr Trevor Manuel, Minister of Finance, Ms Maria Ramos, the Director-General of Finance and
the staff of the Department of Finance for their support of the Reserve Bank over the past year. I should
like to thank the directors of the Reserve Bank, including the deputy governors, for their undivided loyalty to
the Bank. On this occasion, it is also fitting to pay further tribute to Dr Chris Stals for his term of ten years
as Governor and just more than 44 years in the service of the Bank. Dr Stals made numerous valuable
contributions to the work of the Bank and for the benefit of South Africa during his career, for which we are
deeply grateful. Dr Chris de Swardt, Deputy Governor for almost ten years, also retired recently after a
distinguished career of nearly 44½ years in the Bank. We wish both Dr Stals and Dr de Swardt, as well as
their wives, a happy retirement and fulfilling years ahead. Finally, I wish to thank the staff of the Reserve
Bank for the professional manner in which they performed their duties in the past year. I am confident that
with their continued loyal support, the Bank will meet the challenges that lie ahead
Page 5