Titulo: Governor’s Address at the eighty-third ordinary general meeting of shareholders
Data: 2003-08-26
Palestrante (estimado): None
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/governor's-address-to-shareholders/2003/176
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/governor%27s-address-to-shareholders/2003/176/Eng+media.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

S O U T H A F R I C A N R E S E R V E B A N K
Governor’s Address
Condensed address of Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,
at the eighty-third ordinary general meeting of shareholders of the Bank on 26 August 2003 in Pretoria
Introduction are fairly price competitive, but the profitability of their 2.The public’s demand for bank credit remained
The South African Reserve Bank achieved international transactions has, of course, fluctuated resilient. Having declined from 12,5 per cent in
considerable success on many fronts under difficult considerably over the past three years. June 2002 to 7,8 per cent in December, the twelve-
economic conditions during the past year. In the Domestic output could not escape the impact of the month growth rate in banks’ total loans and
monetary field, prompt action during 2002 helped to still subdued global economy. Growth in real gross advances to the domestic private sector picked up
restrain inflationary expectations as well as to maintain domestic product slowed down from 31/per cent in the again to 12,7 per cent in June 2003.
2
international confidence in the country’s commitment first half of 2002 to 3 per cent in the second half and 11/ 3.The money market continued to be relatively
2
to responsible macroeconomic policies. The strength of per cent in the first half of 2003. The slower growth was liquid. The daily liquidity requirement of banks
international confidence is reflected in the recovery in accompanied by an increase in aggregate employment was maintained at around R11 billion by means of
the rand’s international value, which was a major factor in the formal non-agricultural sectors of the economy in various operational procedures.
in reining back inflationary pressures. In the process, 2002. However, preliminary indicators point to a loss in
4.Short-term interest rates began to move down-
the oversold net open foreign reserve position (NOFP) employment opportunities in the first half of 2003.
wards from April 2003. Having increased by
was finally expunged in May 2003. Against this
The decline in the rate of economic growth was due about 400 basis points in conjunction with the
background, it has been possible to lower interest rates
to a fall in the volume of exports, whereas domestic repo rate during the first nine months of 2002
in recent months.
demand continued to increase strongly. The level of and then stabilising at this higher level for the
In the banking sector, financial stability has short-term interest rates seems to have had little effect next six months, short-term rates declined by
been restored after the serious liquidity problems on domestic demand. The rate of increase in domestic approximately 200 basis points up to the end of
experienced in the first half of 2002. The banking sector final demand declined only marginally from 4 per cent July 2003.
remains soundly capitalised and well managed, and in 2002 to 31/ per cent in the first half of 2003. The
2 5.Private-sector companies made increased use of
significant progress has been made in the further annualised growth in real gross domestic expenditure
the primary bond market to finance activities.
application of international best practices in banking nevertheless remained at 41/per cent in the second half
2 The outstanding value of private-sector loan
supervision. The highly-developed structure and of 2002 and in the first half of 2003.
stock listed on the Bond Exchange of South Africa
international competitiveness of the country’s financial
Growth in real household consumption expenditure therefore increased from R29 billion in June 2002
system as a whole remains a significant national
strength. slowed only slightly from an annualised rate of 3 per cent to R42 billion in June 2003.
in the second half of 2002 to 21/per cent in the first half
In the administration of the Bank, costs were of 2003. The sustained high g 2 rowth in consumption 6.Long-term bond yields trended downward
reduced significantly and in a number of instances expenditure was made possible by relatively strong from late March 2002, reflecting the market’s
departments were restructured, streamlined and staff increases in personal disposable income as well as by a favourable view of the long-term prospects for
numbers reduced. rise in household debt. The steadfast growth in inflation and the impact of a small public-sector
borrowing requirement.
The international economic environment household consumption expenditure was accompanied
The economic recovery remains weak and fragile. by an annualised increase in real government 7.Share prices began to recover during 2003.
Having improved towards the end of 2001 and during consumption expenditure varying from quarter to Having declined by 37 per cent from 22 May 2002
the first half of 2002, global economic activity suffered a quarter between 31/ 2 and 4 per cent throughout the to 25 April 2003, the all-share price index
setback in the second half of 2002 when business past year. recovered by 20 per cent to the end of July.
confidence was detrimentally affected by revelations of The rate of increase in real fixed capital formation Public finance
corporate accounting malpractices, further declines in picked up during 2002 and reached an annualised level Amore expansionary fiscal policy stance has been
equity values and the threat of war against Iraq. In the of 9 per cent in the second half of the year. This rate then adopted by government since the 2001 Budget, while
first half of 2003 equity prices generally began to rise receded to a still high 8 per cent in the first half of 2003, the policy remained supportive of lowering inflation
and the war in Iraq was concluded without severely brought down by a decline in the fixed investment of and promoting stability. This cautious expansionary
impacting on oil production. Yet growth in most of the agricultural sector associated with lower profits of fiscal stance is set to be maintained over the medium
the large industrial countries failed to meet earlier farmers because of the marked drop in the prices term to increase the long-term growth capacity of
expectations. In emerging-market economies growth on of some key agricultural products. Other sectors
the economy.
the whole was quite robust in Asia and in Europe, while continued to spend large amounts on the replacement
Monetary policy
it was moderate in Africa and weak in Latin America. of obsolete capital equipment and the development of
As could be expected under these circumstances, new ventures. Monetary policy was dominated in the past year by
having to respond to the inflationary pressures arising
unemployment increased in most advanced economies In contrast to the continued strong growth of
from exogenous shocks in the form of a substantial
as well as in Latin America and Africa. Employment domestic demand, exports performed less well. In fact,
depreciation in the external value of the rand in late
creation in emerging-market economies remains one of the volume of exports of goods and non-factor services
2001 and a sharp rise in international oil prices. These
the most pressing challenges facing the world to ensure declined by 11/per cent in 2002 and by a further 21/per
2 2
the maintenance of stability and the reduction of poverty. cent in the first half of 2003. In 2002 the decline in the shocks were mainly responsible for a surge in the
With the exception of parts of Latin America and some volume of exports coincided with an increase in the twelve-month rate of increase in the consumer price
countries in Africa, global inflation remained low. volume of imports. Despite a decrease in crude oil index for metropolitan and other urban areas excluding
interest on mortgages (CPIX) from a low of 5,8 per cent
The combination of low economic growth, increased imports, the volume of total imports continued to
in September 2001 to a peak of 11,3 per cent in October
unemployment and disinflation generally led to the increase in the first half of 2003. The terms of trade
and November 2002.
adoption of expansionary monetary and fiscal policies strengthened in both 2002 and the first half of 2003,
in advanced economies. Interest rates were brought while net dividend and interest payments declined. As a result, the Monetary Policy Committee was
down to very low levels in most developed countries These developments could nevertheless not prevent the obliged to increase the repo rate by 400 basis points in
and fiscal deficits widened. However, these measures balance on the current account from reverting from a total during the first nine months of 2002. These
were unable to prevent some major corporate defaults. surplus in 2002 to a deficit of nearly 1 per cent of gross increases were prompted by the fact that the
Of further concern is the volatility experienced in domestic product in the first half of 2003. This deficit inflationary pressures, which were at first mainly
exchange rates and its effect not only on the financial was more than neutralised by a financial inflow from confined to rising food and energy prices, became more
sector, but also on real economic activity. In particular, the rest of the world consisting mainly of foreign broadly based and in the end not only influenced the
the US dollar has weakened substantially, which could direct investment, borrowing by the South African prices of goods but also the prices of services which are
have major repercussions for the world economy. government in international capital markets and net not directly affected by exchange rate developments.
Domestic economic developments inflows of other portfolio capital. The increase in the repo rate was further based on
On the monetary and financial fronts, the main factors such as rising inflation expectations, increasing
The weakness of the US dollar was a major factor in
developments during the past eighteen months can be nominal unit labour costs and high growth in money
a significant recovery in the external value of the rand.
summarised as follows: supply and bank credit extension.
Having declined by 34 per cent on a trade-weighted
basis during 2001, the nominal effective exchange rate 1.The rate of increase in the monetary aggregates Although it was still unclear at the meeting of the
of the rand recovered by 24 per cent in 2002 and by a slowed down significantly. For instance, the Monetary Policy Committee in November 2002
further 12 per cent up to the end of July 2003. Similarly, growth in the broadly defined money supply whether the higher interest rate levels would be
the real effective exchange rate of the rand recovered (M3) measured over periods of twelve months effective, the repo rate was kept unchanged because a
markedly over this period. The level of the real effective declined from around 19 per cent in the early part number of developments indicated that inflationary
exchange rate of the rand is nevertheless still below the of 2002 to less than 13 per cent in December 2002 pressures could begin to abate. These included a decline
index values of early 2000, i.e. before the currency market and to single-digit rates during most of the first in the quarter-to-quarter production price index from
turbulence. This indicates that South African producers six months of 2003. 26,0 per cent in the first quarter of 2002 to 11,2 per cent
SOUTH AFRICAN RESERVE BANK
in the third quarter; a strengthening in the external The authorities can only aim at creating underlying Regional economic co-operation
value of the rand; a decline in international oil prices; economic conditions that are conducive to exchange
The promotion of regional economic co-operation in
slower growth in bank credit extension; and a rate stability. One of the factors that has contributed to
Africa generally and in the Southern African
deceleration in the pace of growth in the more broadly the large fluctuations of the rand in the past has been
Development Community (SADC) more specifically
defined money supply aggregates. the large oversold NOFPof the Bank. The Bank’s stated
continues to form part of the other major activities of the
objective has been to eliminate this open position,
By the time of the March 2003 meeting of the South African Reserve Bank. The Bank fully supports
which stood at US$23,2 billion at the end of September
Monetary Policy Committee it was clear that the rise in the New Partnership for Africa’s Development
1998. During the past year the Bank purchased fairly
inflation had been contained. The twelve-month rate of (Nepad) goals of accelerated growth and sustainable
modest amounts of foreign currency in the market
increase in CPIX had fallen to 9,3 per cent and that of the development, poverty eradication and reversing the
at appropriate times, and also delivered the proceeds
production price index to 6,2 per cent. In addition, the
of the government’s global eurobond issue of marginalisation of Africa in the globalisation process.
growth in money supply and bank credit extension had
US$1,25 billion in May 2003 against the oversold We will continue to play an active role towards the
come down to single-digit levels and the rand had
forward exchange book of the Bank. These transactions realisation of these ideals.
recovered remarkably in the second half of 2002.
converted the oversold NOFP of US$1,8 billion in The Bank has also participated actively in the
Despite this more positive picture, some other
mid-2002 to an overbought position of US$0,9 billion at Committee of Central Bank Governors in the SADC
developments caused the Monetary Policy Committee
the end of July 2003. Having removed this perceived
region during the past year.
to remain cautious about changing the policy stance
vulnerability, the price discovery process in the foreign-
prematurely. In particular, the Committee was exchange market has been displaying a better two-way Internal administration
influenced by the fact that the meeting took place on the trading pattern. A number of changes were again made to the
day that the war in Iraq started. At that stage it was With the oversold NOFPnow expunged, the Bank internal administration of the Reserve Bank in the past
uncertain what the impact of the war would be on the has shifted its focus to reducing its oversold forward year. In particular, the reduction of costs without loss of
global economy, and more specifically on oil prices. book and to seeking over time to strengthen the official productivity received high priority. Staff and
Other considerations that led to the decision to keep the foreign exchange reserve position. The balance on the operational costs were thoroughly scrutinised to
repo rate unchanged included concerns about the level oversold forward book stood at US$4,1 billion at the minimise expenses. A moratorium was placed on
of wage settlements, rising unit labour costs, large end of July 2003, compared with US$7 billion at the time appointments with effect from 1 August 2002 to reduce
increases in some administered prices and a forecast of the previous annual meeting of the Bank. staff numbers. Moreover, voluntary early retirement
that CPIX inflation would be close to the upper limit of
Stability in the banking sector packages were offered during April 2003 to staff
the inflation target in 2004.
members aged 50 and older to curtail costs. Atotal of
The liquidity problems experienced by smaller
At its June 2003 meeting the Monetary Policy 173 responses have been received to date, of which
banks and the eventual erosion of the deposit base of
Committee was confronted by a revision of the inflation some of the bigger banks in the first half of 2002, were 114 staff members indicated that they accept the offer.
figures by Statistics South Africa. Taking this revision
resolved in a satisfactory manner during the past year. Cost reduction and improved efficiency in
and more recent economic developments into In this process, however, certain consequences for the particular received attention in the fields of information
consideration, the Bank’s forecast indicated that the banking industry could not be avoided. The activities and communication technology and in the cash
inflation rate would move within the target range of two of the larger banks, Saambou Bank Limited and handling strategy. To avoid duplication and save costs,
during the second half of 2003 and would come close to BoE Bank Limited, were merged with those of the big
the former Money and Capital Market Department and
the mid-point of the target range in 2004. Anumber of domestic banks. In addition, the reluctance of
International Banking Department were also merged
other factors also influenced the decision to reduce the depositors to place funds with smaller banks caused
into one new department, the Financial Markets
repo rate by 150 basis points at this meeting. First, the some of these banks to cancel their banking
Department. Cost saving was also achieved in the
end of the war in Iraq had brought greater stability to registrations, while others redesigned their ownership
Bank’s subsidiaries by reducing staff, restructuring
the oil market. Second, it was clear that the exchange structures and downsized their balance sheets.
management and new marketing initiatives.
rate of the rand was maintaining its recovered levels in The turbulence experienced in the banking sector
spite of continued volatility. Third, there were clear therefore resulted in a consolidation of activities before The training and development of staff continue to be
signs that inflation pressures emanating from abroad a return to stability was achieved. At the end of June important objectives of the Bank. In this regard
would remain weak. Finally, inflation expectations had 2003, approximately 83 per cent of total deposits by the the South African Reserve Bank College again played
declined in South Africa and domestic conditions public landed in the vaults of the big four banks. a major role by offering a variety of learning
generally favoured disinflation. This has made it more difficult to start new banks or for programmes. The various departments also put
small banks to remain in business, which could considerable effort into on-the-job training of staff
Another development at this meeting was the
affect the availability of operational capital for new members. The Bank is further committed to achieving
decision to increase the number of meetings of the
entrepreneurs. its objectives for staff transformation by 2005, and
Monetary Policy Committee from four to six per year.
The previous decision to limit the number of scheduled Despite these developments, South Africa’s banking reports annually on its progress to the Department of
meetings to four was prompted by the argument that system remains sound. Banks operating in the country Labour in terms of the Employment Equity Act, No 55
the meetings should coincide with the availability of are well capitalised, with an average risk-weighted of 1998.
quarterly data. However, this led to long intervals capital adequacy ratio of 12,4 per cent at the end of June In keeping with the decision of the shareholders on
between some meetings. It was therefore decided that 2003. The liquidity of the banking sector was generally 25 April 2002 to terminate the listing of the Bank on
adequate, while the quality of assets remained high.
even if the latest quarterly data were not available at the JSE Securities Exchange South Africa, an Over-
A special independent investigation concerning
each meeting, there should be enough high-frequency the-counter Share Transfer Facility for trading Reserve
corporate governance has also confirmed that South
statistics to take informed decisions. More frequent Bank shares was established. This facility has delivered
Africa’s leading banks are committed to high standards
meetings should have the added advantage of reducing the desired results and 87 registrations in respect of
of management. The banks adhere broadly to
the fear of sudden and unexpected interest rate 240 237 shares were effected up to 31 March 2003.
international best practice.
adjustments, and in this way promote monetary policy
Finally, the extensions to the head office building,
transparency further. Although continued vigilance is required to ensure
which were started in 2001, were completed. The
that banks comply with evolving standards, there are
On 14 August 2003, the Monetary Policy Committee no major concerns in this regard. Banks are well on building now meets the Bank’s requirements in respect
announced a further reduction of 100 basis points in the course to bringing their risk-management systems and of office space, parking and conference facilities. Staff
repo rate to a level of 11 per cent. This decision was data models in line with what could be required members who had to work in other buildings or who
taken because the decline in the inflation rate continued for compliance with Basel II in 2007. Following had to be relocated to other premises for the duration of
to be in line with the Reserve Bank’s projections and the international corporate failures, accounting and the building alterations, have been moved back to the
inflation outlook generally remained favourable. auditing standards have been revised or are being head office building.
However, the Committee expressed concern about the overhauled. As part of the ongoing endeavours to
Acknowledgements
high rates of increase in some administered prices, the ensure the quality and transparency of financial
level of wage settlements, the continued strong reporting, a shift was made during the past year away All these improvements in the functioning of the
performance of domestic demand and the acceleration from historical cost to fair value accounting of financial Reserve Bank could only be achieved with the help of
in money supply growth in the second quarter of 2003. instruments, i.e. the application of Accounting other persons and institutions. In conclusion, I therefore
Exchange rate policy Statement AC 133. Compliance with these standards want to thank everyone who assisted the Bank to
and new legislation are major tasks. accomplish its objectives. In this regard I have to name
Exchange rate policy was left unchanged in the past
the Presidency, the Government and Parliament for
Another challenge facing the banking sector is to
year. As in the preceding year, the determination of the
their support of our work. I also wish to express my
provide broader access to affordable financial services.
external value of the rand was left to the market and the
A large portion of the population still does not have appreciation to the Board of Directors of the Reserve
Bank did not intervene in the foreign-exchange market
access to banking facilities. The financial sector is Bank, including the deputy governors, for their
to affect the level or direction of the exchange rate.
further in the process of developing a Financial Sector commitment to the Bank. In particular, I want to thank
The exchange rate of the rand was quite volatile in Black Economic Empowerment Charter to promote Dr M T de Waal, who retired from the Board, for his
the past year. Although the Bank would prefer to increased black ownership of and access to financial contributions over the past years. Last but not least,
have greater exchange rate stability, fluctuations in the firms. Moreover, ever since the attacks on the World I want to thank the management and staff of the Bank
external value of the rand are unavoidable in the Trade Centre on 11 September 2001, the need for for the outstanding way in which they performed
current international monetary system of generally multilateral co-ordination to ensure continuity in their duties.
floating exchange rates. We know from experience that financial systems has been high on the agenda of the
This is a truly remarkable institution to be associated
even if the rand was pegged to another currency or to a banking sector. The Bank has assisted in the
with.
basket of currencies, it would still float against most establishment of a Financial Sector Contingency Forum
currencies and fluctuate widely at times. for such contingency planning. Thank you.
http://www.reservebank.co.za SIMEKATWSCREATIVE