Titulo: Address by Mr T.T. Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the seminar on “Deepening Financial Sectors in Africa: Experiences and Policy Options”, co-organised and co-sponsored by the IMF/AFR and DFID. Johannesburg,7 November 2006
Data: 2006-11-07
Palestrante (estimado): T.T. Mboweni
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2006/124
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2006/124/IMF-capital+markets-7+nov06a.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

- 1 -
Deepening Capital Markets:
The Case of South Africa
Address by Mr T.T. Mboweni,
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,
at the seminar on “Deepening Financial Sectors in Africa:
Experiences and Policy Options”, co-organised and co-
sponsored by the IMF/AFR and DFID.
Johannesburg,
7 November 2006
Honoured guests;
Finance ministers;
Central bank governors;
Representatives from banks and stock exchanges;
Representatives from the World Bank and IFC; and
Other officials
Ladies and Gentlemen
1. Introduction
The links between finance, economic development and
macroeconomic policies have been central themes of some thought-
provoking presentations earlier today. Capital markets with adequate
depth play an essential role in economic development by mobilising
funds to finance longer-term projects. Naturally, the experience of
countries in deepening their capital markets differs, and it is my
Embargo: Check against delivery
- 2 -
pleasure and honour today to share with you the case of South Africa,
which stands out among emerging markets as having relatively well
developed capital markets.
2. The current state of South Africa’s capital markets
As is well known, the market for long-term funds typically consists
of three main components, namely long-term bank loans and deposits,
the bond market and the equity market. These components serve
different purposes and are, therefore, complementary to each other. In
an environment where all three components of the capital market are
adequately efficient, bank loans would generally provide bridging
finance or be used for smaller amounts of funding. When larger
projects are to be funded and as credit ratings improve, it makes more
sense to issue bonds, because of the lower and fixed funding costs.
However, maintaining a good credit rating implies that an acceptable
debt/equity ratio has to be maintained, which in turn requires funding in
the form of equity. In this regard, the equity market plays an essential
role. South Africa is in the fortunate position, compared to many other
emerging markets, in that all three components of its capital market are
well developed.
2.1 The banking sector
I will not spend too much time on the banking sector, but for the
sake of completeness, I would like to mention a few things about the
South African banking sector. There are currently 18 registered banks,
two registered mutual banks and 15 registered branches of
international banks in South Africa, with combined assets of just below
R2 trillion. The banking sector in South Africa is highly integrated with
Embargo: Check against delivery
- 3 -
the bond and equity markets. South Africa has eight banks that act as
primary dealers in the bond market, and the four big banks are also
settlement agents of the Bond Exchange of South Africa, with the
South African Reserve Bank as fifth agent. Most banks have active
trading desks in bonds as well as in equities, contributing largely to the
liquidity of these instruments. Seven banks, including the five biggest
banks, are listed on the JSE.
All banks registered in South Africa are closely supervised by the
Bank Supervision Department of the South African Reserve Bank to
ensure that they remain well capitalised commensurate with their risk
profiles, that they have proper corporate governance and risk
management frameworks in place, and that they make adequate
provision for bad debt.
2.2 The bond and equity markets: Measurements of breadth and
depth
Both the bond and equity markets are formalised and exchange-
driven, in the form of the Bond Exchange of South Africa (Besa) and
the JSE Limited (JSE). These exchanges have been very successful in
fulfilling their function of raising funds and mobilising capital. In 2005, a
total net amount of R23,8 billion was raised through the primary
issuance of bonds on Besa (after repayments of redemptions), and
R82,2 billion of share capital was raised by companies listed on the
JSE. Combined, this equals almost seven per cent of GDP.
Market breadth is usually described by the size of a market and
number of participants. The total value of bonds listed on Besa
Embargo: Check against delivery
- 4 -
currently amounts to just over R700 billion – about 46 per cent of gross
domestic product (GDP) for 2005. The market capitalisation of the JSE
as at the end of October 2006 was close to R4,7 trillion, more than
three times the size of GDP for 2005. As at the end of October, bonds
of more than 70 different issuers were listed on Besa, representing the
central government, local government, parastatals as well as the
private corporate sector. On the JSE, 380 companies were listed,
representing all sectors of the economy.
Market depth is normally more difficult to measure. Depth refers
to liquidity – that is, the ability to execute transactions of a
representative size cheaply and rapidly without having too much of an
affect on the price. There are a number of proxy measures for liquidity,
such as the bid/offer spread, the turnover per year and the turnover as
a ratio of market capitalisation.
The bid/offer spread on shares varies from company to company.
Recently a quick assessment of the bid/offer spread of a
representative selection of companies listed on the JSE was made in
the Bank, and it was found that the spread as percentage of the last
traded price was very small – in most cases less than half a
percentage point. With regard to bonds, primary dealers quote a
maximum spread of five basis points on the benchmark bonds in which
they have to make a market, with an understanding that this spread
would be even narrower in a stable trading environment.
In terms of secondary market turnover, bonds to the nominal
value of R8,1 trillion were traded on Besa in 2005 - about 38 times the
market capitalisation as at the end of December 2005. Turnover on the
Embargo: Check against delivery
- 5 -
JSE amounted to R1,3 trillion – about 35 per cent of the total market
capitalisation of R3,6 billion as at the end of December 2005. Both
ratios indicate good liquidity.
Non-residents make a significant contribution to turnover and
liquidity on both the JSE and Besa, accounting for around 20 per cent
of the daily turnover on both exchanges. There continues to be strong
demand from non-residents for South African financial assets: In the
year to the end of October, their net purchases of bonds and equities
amounted to R20,5 billion and R65 billion, respectively.
3. Capital market development in South Africa
3.1 The bond market
Unlike many African and emerging-market countries, South
Africa relies more on its domestic bond market than on international
borrowing. This is partly due to historical reasons, but also due to the
preferences of the current government.
In the 1970s and 1980s, sanctions were progressively imposed
on South Africa, and the country was effectively denied access to
international financial markets. At the same time, the government of
the day ran large deficits, at times as high as six per cent of GDP. This,
of course, was at times imprudent fiscal policy, but it had at least the
one benefit of contributing to the development of the domestic bond
market. The government had no option but to fund its growing budget
deficit in the domestic bond market. Against the backdrop of exchange
control regulations and prescribed asset requirements, the large non-
bank financial institutions provided a ready demand for these bonds.
Embargo: Check against delivery
- 6 -
Needless to say, government and semi-government debt dominated
issuances in the domestic bond market.
At that time, the bond market was still very informal. The
government issued bonds periodically, there were no real pricing
benchmarks and there was very little transparency. Following
investigations into the deficiencies in the bond market, a number of
structural improvements were made during the late 1980s and the
1990s. These included the consolidation of government bonds into a
few benchmark bonds, the development of a proper yield curve and
the introduction of a well-communicated and structured programme by
the government in terms of which it issued bonds at regular auctions.
These auctions were, and still are, conducted by the South African
Reserve Bank on behalf of the government.
Alongside the government’s steps to improve the structure of the
primary bond market, the South African Reserve Bank played an active
role in developing the secondary bond market. In 1990, the Bank
started to quote firm two-way prices in a number of benchmark
government bonds, thereby acting as an informal market maker. This
initiative was specifically aimed at improving the turnover, liquidity and
marketability of government bonds in the secondary market. In order to
ensure that the SARB fulfilled its function as funding agent for the
government by being a net seller of government bonds, even in
adverse market conditions, the Bank also became a leading player in
the trading of bond derivatives.
A major step forward in formalising the bond market was the
establishment of the Bond Market Association (BMA) - a self-regulatory
Embargo: Check against delivery
- 7 -
organisation – in the mid-1980s. The SARB was a founding member of
the BMA and an active participant until 1996, when the BMA was
granted an exchange license and transformed into Besa. The
establishment of Besa introduced a period of rapid development in the
South African bond market, both technologically and in terms of market
breadth and depth. Some major developments included the
introduction of electronic trading, matching and settlement, the
immobilisation and subsequent dematerialisation of bonds listed on
Besa, the development of a series of total return indices for
government and corporate bonds, and the development of a more
refined yield curve.
By the late 1990s, the secondary market was judged to be
mature enough for the Bank to reduce its involvement in this market. In
order to improve the efficiency and transparency of the secondary
market, a panel of primary dealers was appointed in 1998, comprising
a selection of registered South African banks and branches of
international banks. The selection was based on a set of criteria to
ensure that such primary dealers would have the capacity to deal with
the inherent risks associated with market making.
The National Treasury continued to contribute to the
development of the domestic bond market by introducing new types of
bonds for which there was demand in the market. These included
inflation-linked bonds, floating-rate notes, a Strip programme (standing
for Separate Trading of Registered Interest and Principle) and retail
bonds, which makes the bond market accessible for smaller investors.
This last initiative was enhanced by the introduction of Standard
Bank’s retail bonds earlier this year.
Embargo: Check against delivery
- 8 -
The government and the South African Reserve Bank played key
roles in the development of the South African bond market. However, it
is interesting to note that as soon as a certain level of market depth
was reached, the private sector started to play a much more active
role. In recent years, the growth in corporate bond issuances has by
far outstripped those of government bonds. In 1996, government
bonds accounted for over 80 per cent of the total debt listed on Besa.
That ratio had declined to 66 per cent by mid-2006. Prudent fiscal
policy has resulted in smaller and smaller budget deficits, requiring
lesser amounts of funding in the domestic bond market. There is a
good chance that the South African government will have a budget
surplus in the 2007/08 fiscal year, which will most likely imply a
reduction in the nominal value of government bonds listed on Besa.
This will create even more room for the corporate sector and local
government bodies to issue debt in new and innovative ways.
The biggest amount raised in a single debt issuance to date was
the R6,5 billion raised on 5 July 2006 by cellphone company MTN, to
fund its acquisition of Dubai-based Investcom. This issuance illustrated
the healthy demand for corporate bonds, as the book size exceeded
R10 billion. The funds were raised at a yield of close to 8,80 per cent
for periods of four and eight years. Both Eskom’s and MTN’s recent
bonds are included in the All-bond-index of Besa – a clear sign of
corporate bonds becoming more liquid and thinning the representation
of government bonds in the index.
A number of recent developments in the corporate bond arena
illustrate how the bond market facilitates the development of
Embargo: Check against delivery
- 9 -
infrastructure and economic growth. South Africa’s electricity supplier,
Eskom, registered a R65 billion multi-term note programme with Besa
in March 2006. It launched the first R2,5 billion in March 2006 by
issuing a bond with a maturity of 27,5 years, making it the corporate
bond with the longest tenor in the history of the South African bond
market. The issuance was oversubscribed, allowing Eskom to secure
this long-term funding at a yield of 7,48 per cent, which is currently one
percentage point below the repo rate of the South African Reserve
Bank.
Similarly, the transport parastatal, Transnet, has announced
plans to issue bonds and other debt to the value of R18,1 billion to
fund an upgrade of its ports and railways. According to Transnet, the
money will be raised over three years from both the domestic and
international markets.
Finally, a development that is likely to be significant in a regional
context is the R350 million that was raised on Besa by the Mauritius
Commercial Bank – the first regional or international inward-listed bond
in South Africa, which was facilitated by the further relaxation of
exchange control in October 2006.
3.2 The equity market
The JSE was founded as far back as 1887 and is currently
ranked 17th in the World Federation of Stock Exchanges, based on its
market capitalisation in US dollar terms. In the late 1990s, a number of
developments were introduced to improve trading on the JSE. The
open-outcry floor was replaced by an order-driven, centralised,
automated trading system. The JSE also introduced a real-time news
Embargo: Check against delivery
- 10 -
service for the dissemination of company announcements and price
sensitive information. Trading on the JSE was fully automated through
an electronic clearing and settlement system, STRATE (Share
TRAnsactions Totally Electronic). In 2001, the JSE merged with the
South African Futures Exchange (Safex) and thereby become the
leader in both equities and derivatives trading in the South African
market.
An important milestone for the JSE was the strategic alliance that
was formed with the London Stock Exchange (LSE) in 2002. In this
year, all shares were dematerialised and migrated to the STRATE
environment with guaranteed T+5 settlement for all JSE main board
trades.
As part of the JSE’s alliance with the LSE, its trading system was
replaced with the SETS system hosted by the LSE. More than just a
change in technology platforms, this change improved the international
visibility and acceptability of the JSE. In addition, the JSE modernised
its operations with the launch of a new indexing system in conjunction
with the FTSE, the FTSE/JSE African Index Series and free-float
adjusted series. This system provided international investors with an
indexing system with which they are familiar.
The alliance with the LSE required a review of the JSE’s Main
Board listing requirements to bring it in line with international best
practice. This caused a decline in the number of listed companies. In
order to continue providing an opportunity for small to medium-sized
companies of good quality and with high growth potential to raise
capital, the JSE launched an alternative exchange (AltX).
Embargo: Check against delivery
- 11 -
In 2005, the JSE expanded its product base to include not only
equities and derivatives, but also interest-rate products with the launch
of Yield-X, which is a “one-stop yield shop” for a wide range of spot
and derivative interest-rate products traded on one platform. In
partnership with Deutsche Bank, the JSE also listed its first Exchange
Traded Funds (ETFs).
The latest development in the long history of the JSE was its own
demutualisation in 2005. It became a public unlisted company on 1
July 2005, and listed on its own exchange a year later.
4. Conclusion
South Africa’s capital markets have enjoyed an extended rally
over the last few years. Bond yields declined to record lows in the first
quarter of 2006, while the All-share-index of the JSE still continued to
break record high levels in October 2006. Bond yields have, however,
risen since May 2006, reflecting the tighter monetary policy stance of
the Bank since June 2006 as well as some repricing of emerging-
market risk by global investors. However, a number of structural
improvements should continue to support the South African bond
market. These include the government’s fiscal discipline, South Africa’s
recent credit rating upgrades, the entrenchment of inflation
expectations within the inflation target range, continued innovation in
terms of products and processes, and the growth of the corporate bond
sector.
Going forward, capital market development and economic growth
Embargo: Check against delivery
- 12 -
prospects in South Africa are expected to be mutually reinforcing. The
South African markets should continue to benefit over the longer term
from the improved growth prospects for the South African economy,
which are supported by the government’s infrastructure development
programme and the Accelerated Shared Growth Initiative for South
Africa (Asgisa). At the same time, the capital markets will help facilitate
the economic growth process by providing an efficient source of
finance to both the public and private sectors.
I thank you.
Embargo: Check against delivery