Titulo: Cranefield College of Project and Programme Management Graduation Address by X.P. Guma, Chairperson of Council
Data: 2007-01-26
Palestrante (estimado): X.P. Guma
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-archive/2007/25
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-archive/2007/25/cranefield-college.23.3.2007.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Embargo: Friday, 23 March 2007 at 16:00 hours
Cranefield College of Project and Programme Management
Graduation Address
by
X.P. Guma, Chairperson of Council
B.A. (Economics and Accounting) University of Botswana and
Swaziland
M.A. (Economics) University of Toronto
PhD (Economics) Victoria University of Manchester
1. INTRODUCTION
• Principal of Cranefield College, Prof P. Steyn;
• Distinguished colleagues, members of the Governing Council of
Cranefield College;
• Graduands;
• Parents and relatives of the graduands;
• Ladies and gentlemen,
It is my pleasure to welcome you to this our 14th graduation Ceremony: the
first for 2007. This is worthy of mention if only because 2007 will be the
year during which the higher education sector will first admit those school-
leavers who have spent their entire school careers in a free and
democratic South Africa.
Were we to use the American expression “Commencement” rather than
graduation – with which many are more familiar – likely, we would note,
immediately that the composition of the body of persons entering the
higher education sector will be expected now better to reflect the
demographics of our society – a path on which Cranefield College
commenced from its inception: and which is evident in the evolving
composition of its Council and its student’ enrolment.
- 2 -
2. A PERSPECTIVE
Before addressing the graduands, it may be appropriate for me to note a
few pertinent issues. First, as Vice-Chancellor B. Pityana of UNISA has
noted,
… In any society, …prosperity presupposes a well-equipped and
trained source of human capital, capable of facilitating the required
development, and there can be no doubt that in that sense, higher
education is a national resource.¹
In South Africa, moreover,
… there is now an urgent need for higher education institutions to
respond in a more targeted fashion to national growth and
development needs.²
We at Cranefield anticipated this requirement early on, constituting ourselves
as a targeted “College of Project and Programme Management”.
Second, it does appear to be a justifiable concern, here and abroad that in
general, we may be breeding a culture of mediocrity, where excellence and
aspiration are no longer “cool” or fashionable: where too many of our young
people love the high life but do not wish to work to attain it.
1. B. Pityana (2007) “Increasing the Business Viability & Employment Growth in the Country –
A Higher Education Perspective”; Keynote address, Skills Development Summit, Sandton,
Johannesburg
2. ibid.
- 3 -
What is more worrying still is the fact that many of the young people who
emerge from the school system, seem to be the worse for it. As an
exasperated Professor Jansen has stated: -
… while some schools celebrate “a 100% pass in matric”, their
graduates run around Pretoria East, beating up homeless and
anonymous black citizens. Young people, who should be in school,
run rampant through our society killing and maiming at random. …
Growing numbers of school-age children begin to overpopulate the
prison system….³
And yet it must be stressed, as Prof Jansen does, that it is not true that all
young people suffer from these pathologies. We would point to the enormous
drive towards aspiration and achievement of today’s graduands, in
counterpoise.
Viewed from an historical perspective, it is interesting to recall the views of
John Maynard Keynes – one of the towering economists of the twentieth
century – regarding “the triple evils of modern society”. The first evil, in
Keynes’ view – which has resonance in South Africa today – is the “vast
enrichment of individuals out of proportion to any services rendered”.
He saw the second and third evils as being “the disappointment of
expectations and difficulty of laying plans ahead”; and third “unemployment”.
Re-stated in the elegant prose of Mervyn King, “Fat cats, short-termism, and
the jobless society”, this in the United Kingdom, in 1923!4
3. Jansen, J (2006) “Teaching the Wrong stuff in a Dangerous World”, Teaching Times.
4. See Mervyn King (1998), Speech at the Employment Policy Institute’s Fourth Annual
Lecture: 1 December
- 4 -
We at Cranefield earn, honestly, that which is attributed to us; acknowledge
the existence of and manage the short and the long-term; and attempt to
make our modest contribution to the improvement of the conditions of our
modern society through thorough training. Not here mediocrity: rather, the
pursuit of excellence.
3. TO THE GRADUANDS
For today’s graduands, this ceremony is the culmination of systematic
application to structured learning. Each one of you, no doubt, has had
high moments and has suffered, at least occasionally, despair: -
moments of absolute clarity and commitment to what you are doing
interspersed, perhaps, with moments of confusion. Each of you has a
story of personal achievement to tell: and tell it you must. Your
achievement is commendable.
You graduate from a credible institution and your qualification is
recognised here at home and internationally. South Africa has many
things for which it could be grateful: today, one of the most important
of these is your achievement. Use it wisely: even to confront the evils
of modern society. As the Greek poet Constantine Cavafy wrote, in his
poem Ithaka; which treats of the ancient evils of the Laistrygonians
and Cyclops, angry Poseidon too: -
… don’t be afraid of them:
you’ll never find things like that on your way
as long as you keep your thoughts raised high,
as long as a rare excitement
stirs your spirit and your body.5
5. C.P. Cavafy (1911) in Edmund Keeley and Philip Sherrard (1992) Collected Poems,
Princeton University Press.
- 5 -
4. CONCLUSION
One clown is alleged one day to have said to another: “Considering
the cost of tuition, clothing and books, a person today, more than ever,
has to be careful, very careful in his/her selection of parents!”.
Viewed from the perspective of parents, however, isn’t it true that you
age by about 20 years per child – between his/her 18th and 22nd year?
Or was I unlucky?
To all, the mothers, fathers, children and other relatives of our
graduands - however well you chose each other, and whatever have
been your relative aging processes – we say, Congratulations indeed!
Savour this moment. Cherish it, for yesterday is history, tomorrow is a
mystery. Today is reality.