Titulo: Welcome and Keynote address by Dr Monde Mnyande, Chief Economist and Executive General Manager of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Bank Note Design Competition Gala Evening of the South African Bank Note Society, Pretoria, 29 August 2007
Data: 2007-08-30
Palestrante (estimado): Monde Mnyande
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2007/43
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2007/43/keynote-address-by-dr-monde-mnyande.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Banknotes will remain an important means of payment in the years
ahead
Welcome and Keynote address by Dr Monde Mnyande,
Chief Economist and Executive General Manager of the South
African Reserve Bank, at the Bank Note Design Competition Gala
Evening of the South African Bank Note Society, Pretoria,
29 August 2007
The Chairperson of the South African Bank Note Society, Dr Heinz Wirz
Distinguished guests
Competition finalists
Lecturers from the respective design schools
Ladies and gentlemen
It is indeed an honour to have been approached last week to deliver this
keynote address. I was privileged to attend the Bank Note Design
Competition for the first time last year and I am quite certain having
glanced briefly at the exhibition, that we can expect an equally impressive
standard of competition this year.
On previous occasions, a comprehensive account has been given by the
relevant keynote speakers on the history of the banknote issuance in
South Africa. And to the extent that this historical information is readily
available on both the website of the South African Bank Note Company
and that of the South African Reserve Bank, I wish tonight to very briefly
highlight the most recent general trends in the means of payment and a
few aspects related to ensuring the continued confidence placed in our
currency.
2
In his abstract, Peter Chartres, writing for the Centre for Central Banking
Studies argued that:
“All central banks aim to preserve the integrity and stability of their
currency. Part of that challenge is to ensure that the currency notes
themselves command the confidence of those who use them.”1
Today, South Africans rely on money in many forms. We buy and sell
products and services using coins, banknotes, cheques, credit cards, and
by means of electronic transactions. While cash remains the dominant
means of payment for relatively low value transactions, recent years have
seen a marked increase in the range and number of payment instruments
and services, particularly retail payments.
In addition to the traditional coins and banknotes and other paper-based
instruments (notably cheques), direct debit and credit transfers, debit and
credit cards, and telephone banking as well as internet banking facilities
have become more widely available. Electronic systems have rapidly
increased in importance, both for retail and wholesale (high value)
transactions to the point where they now account for the majority of
payments in the formal sector, by number as well as by value.
The rand value of notes and coin in circulation has nevertheless shown
considerable growth over the years and amounted to no less than R59
billion at the end of July 2007. However, as other means of payment
have been introduced, the ratio of notes and coin in circulation to gross
domestic product, initially fell quite significantly from a level of about 3,8
1
Peter Chartres, The Issue of Banknotes, Handbooks in Central Banking, No. 18. Centre for Central Banking Studies, Bank
of England
3
per cent of GDP in the early 1970’s to about 2,3 per cent in the early part
of the new century.
Since 2004, there has once again been a reversal in the trend to levels
above 2,5 per cent and this can be ascribed to stronger growth in informal
sector activity and so-called “grey market” transactions, increased social
security transfers and wider circulation of the currency in the SADC
region.
Banknotes in circulation have a distinct behavioural pattern during the
course of a month, and indeed during the course of a year.2 Total notes
and coin outside the Reserve Bank may be divided into the private banks’
holdings of notes and coin in bank vaults and automated teller machines
(ATMs), on the one hand, and the non-bank public’s holdings, on the
other. This seasonal pattern results from conventions and habits
regarding wage and salary payments and household consumption
expenditure.
Many employers pay their employees at or close to the end of the month,
and at that time convert deposits into cash. Though many other
employees are paid by means of direct credits to their bank accounts,
they invariably have a high transactions demand for notes and coin on
payday and withdraw cash from their bank accounts. Soon afterwards, the
cash is spent on goods and services or is used to redeem outstanding
debt.
Businesses and other suppliers accumulate the notes and coin in their
cash registers and then deposit the cash in their bank accounts. The
2 A note on cash holdings in South Africa during the transition to the year 2000, by V V Mamba and J P
van den Heever, SARB Quarterly Bulletin, March 2000.
4
banks, in turn, deposit the cash with the Reserve Bank, causing a decline
in the amount of notes and coin in circulation. This general monthly
scenario is somewhat different for the months of November, December
and January.
From early November in any particular year, the amount of notes and coin
in circulation starts rising strongly on a daily basis, usually reaching a
peak on one of the four days before Christmas. This trend is strengthened
by the payment of annual wage and salary bonuses in November and
December, when many people enjoy an extended holiday and migrant
workers return home.
People generally require more cash when travelling. Most importantly, the
greater spending on gifts, recreation and other holiday goods during the
festive season creates a strong demand for notes and coin. Conversely,
during January the amount of notes and coin in circulation declines
considerably as pay patterns return to normal. It is quite clear however,
that banknotes can most certainly be expected to remain an important
means of payment in the years ahead.
The Bank recognises the importance of using external expertise and
creative contributions in the design phase of our currency and we are
here tonight to honour all those who have participated in this year’s
competition. Internationally, the terms of reference in evaluating banknote
designs are essentially along the lines of ensuring that they do not
discriminate against any gender, race or class. The designs should also
be appealing and should be recognisable as South African, reflecting as
far as possible the diversity of our nation state.
5
The new designs must also as far as possible be timeless, durable, and
publicly acceptable and must eventually be suitable for accommodating
the incorporation of certain important security features. The colour as well
as the images or patterns on the designs should have specific meaning.
They should ideally be designed in such a way that they are acceptable to
those of our nation state who happen to be illiterate and those who are
visually impaired.
When producing banknotes, the South African Bank Note Company in
turn needs to make use of the latest technological developments to
ensure durability and security. The Company must, for example, consult
widely with international banknote printers to find the most appropriate
security features that would provide a deterrent against counterfeiting and
ensure durability at reasonable cost. From a Director of the South African
Bank Note Company, I am sure that the Managing Director of the Bank
Note Company will use my utterances auspiciously in his next year’s
budget proposal to our Board meeting.
As you are no doubt aware, the South African Reserve Bank released its
current series of banknotes into circulation from 1 February 2005. This
was the first redesign of the banknotes since the previous series was
introduced in 1992. South African banknote design is highly regarded
internationally, and the current banknote series has thus far also
withstood any major counterfeiting threat. Banknote redesign every six to
eight years is in line with international best practice and South Africa's
current banknotes are a window on the country, its people, heritage and
culture.
The current design incorporates South Africa’s Coat of Arms and features
all 11 official languages, as well as improved facilities for the partially
6
sighted. These features, together with other steps such as the “Makoya
Moola” public awareness campaign conducted by the Bank to introduce
the current note series to the South African public have been crucial
building blocks in ensuring a more widely representative, sound and
reliable currency for the country. The enthusiasm with which the public
have accepted their new banknotes is a clear indication of their
appreciation and approval.
It is important that research is ongoing into the technology of designing
and producing banknotes. This competition assists us in keeping abreast
of the latest design trends and techniques. The event also serves to
recognise the design industry and there are encouraging indications that
other design faculties and colleges intend becoming involved in future.
The competition provides the opportunity for identifying potential talent
and has this year, from small beginnings in 2002, drawn from three
provinces namely Gauteng, North West and Western Cape and involved
the Cape Peninsular University of Technology, University of Stellenbosch,
Midrand Graduate Institute, University of North West, Open Window
School of Visual Communication, Design School of Southern Africa and
Greenside Design Centre.
A great deal of work goes into these final presentations and students have
to prepare and present their final design in a relatively short space of time.
The finalists can indeed be proud of their achievements given the fact that
it takes the best part of three years to develop an actual banknote.
Selecting the best design for a banknote is, of course, only the first step
towards its creation. A great deal of further work has to be done to
transform a design into a high-precision banknote for large-scale
production.
7
To all the students presenting tonight I wish to congratulate you on your
achievements. I also wish to welcome the staff from the various tertiary
institutions – you can certainly be proud of the diligent work done by your
students in reaching the finals. To those who did not make the finals,
thank you for your participation and hopefully you have gained valuable
insight into the requirements for designing a banknote that may be useful
in other areas of design.
I wish to conclude this address with the following quote from a speech
given by Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the ECB at the opening of
the Euro Banknote Design Exhibition in Athens in 2004:
“…our banknotes are only pieces of printed paper – beautifully designed
paper of great sophistication, but simply printed paper, nonetheless. The
confidence which the public places in a currency is not only based on their
faith in the security features, integrity and quality of the banknotes (and
coins) in their wallets. More importantly, it is based on trust in the
currency’s institutional and economic underpinnings: the objectives and
effectiveness of monetary policy….”3
These words serve to remind us of the important role of monetary policy
in ensuring macroeconomic well-being by maintaining stable prices over
the medium term. The public use banknotes and accept them for
payment of debts because they trust that they will in turn be able to
purchase goods and services to the face value of the banknotes. One of
the main problems of inflation is an erosion of people’s trust in the face
3 Speech by Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the ECB, at the opening of the Euro Banknote
Design Exhibition in Athens, 11 August 2004.
8
value of the notes. This goes to the heart of monetary policy which is the
need to protect the purchasing power of our money.4
The Bank as you know is committed to this by maintaining inflation within
the target range of 3 to 6 per cent. Although the upper limit of the range
has been breached continuously in the last four months, with the most
recent high point of 6,5 per cent in July 2007 – as it was published this
morning, the Bank remains committed to achieving the target range in the
near term, thereby ensuring that continued confidence is placed in our
currency. For all of us, consumers of goods and services in this
economy, prudent handling of our currency in this upward phase of the
business cycle is critical for key price decisions going forward. To this
end monetary policy has been tightened from June last year and the
Monetary Policy Committee has raised interest rates on six occasions
over the past 14 months by 50 basis points at a time.
Tonight we have the privilege of focusing our attention on various
interesting new banknote design concepts and the fact that there is so
much merit in the work of each of the finalists certainly presents the
adjudicators with a formidable task in choosing a clear winner from
amongst the finalists. I look forward to the closer inspection and
discussions of the various banknote designs on display.
Thank you for your attention.
4 Rossouw, J., Background material on the South African Reserve Bank, Discussion Paper DP/06/08,
p1.