Titulo: Presentation to Kagiso Trust by Dr Monde Mnyande,Chief Economist and Executive General Manager of the South African Reserve Bank, on recent economic developments in South Africa
Data: 2008-05-30
Palestrante (estimado): Monde Mnyande
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2008/42
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2008/42/presentation-by-dr-monde-mnyande.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Presentation to Kagiso Trust by Dr Monde Mnyande,
Chief Economist and Executive General Manager of
the South African Reserve Bank, on recent
economic developments
in South Africa
30 May 2008
Chairperson
Board of Trustees
Distinguished guests
It is more than just a privilege to address, among others, the custodians of
policies, philosophy and ethics of this great institution, the Kagiso Trust.
The role of this body to the current political and economic challenges of the
Republic remains as important now as it was when it was first established in
May of 1985.
On my way to the United Kingdom last week, I surprisingly travelled with
Ms B. Njobe, who politely instructed me to change my previous arrangements
to come and debate some salient issues on the state of our economy. I hope
to do so in less than 20 minutes and entertain your views and/or comments as
to how you see the direction of this economy from your respective areas of
interests.
The theme of last week’s fifth Central Banks’ Chief Economist Workshop at the
Bank of England’s Centre for Central Bank Studies was “The Nexus between
macroeconomics dynamics and finance”. About 30 Central Banks’ Chief
Economists and academics from developed and emerging countries
- 2 -
converged to exchange views on this almost classical paradigm or relationship
between the financial sector and current economic growth.
The common worrying factor from the workshop participants seems to be the
level of uncertainty in the global financial sector, following the recent
international financial turbulence – that began in the United States – and its
implications for the world economy.
Analysis presented seems to suggest that the consequences of the uncertainty
to the world economy will more than likely be a protected slowdown in global
economic activity.
Two of South Africa’s major trading partners, the United Kingdom and the
United States, confirmed in the meeting that the outlook for growth and
inflation in their respective countries has deteriorated sharply over the forecast
period. This was confirmed by the figures released earlier this week.
The news of slowing growth and raised inflation projections from most
countries fuelled renewed worries regarding the inherent health and stability of
the global financial system. Nevertheless, all is not doom and gloom – over
the past 15 years authorities have taken numerous steps to increase the
robustness of the system.
Raised inflation projections for most of our trading partners also come from
international energy and food shocks.
Locally, South Africa’s economic growth has performed fairly well in the last
four years. The real economy has recorded growth rates of around 5 per cent
per annum in each of the past four years.
On the prices front, inflation remained within the target range of 6 to 3 per cent
for a protracted period, as CPIX inflation was within the range for a period of
- 3 -
43 months (slightly more than 3 years) up to March 2007. Thereafter it has
unfortunately risen above the target range.
As expected this year, the South African economy lost steam in the first
quarter of 2008. Performance was notably impacted by a series of supply-side
shocks emanating from the international energy and food markets and
domestic energy sector.
Compared to the past four years’ performance, some moderation of economic
growth is indeed anticipated for 2008.
Moderating factors
Real value added by the secondary sector recovered in the fourth quarter of
2007, contributing to the 5,1 per cent real economic growth for 2007 as a
whole. The unsettling performance of factory output in the first quarter of the
year was partly influenced by scrambling for electricity. Along with weaker
demand this suggests that the secondary sector of the economy will
experience a significant slowdown this year.
Growth in the primary sector slowed sharply in the first quarter of 2008, as a
contraction in mining production was recorded, due partly to shaft closures for
safety reasons and to the adverse impact from Eskom’s load shedding. Both
these key employment generating sectors of our economy – the secondary
(manufacturing) and primary (mining) sectors – have fallen prey to the severe
power crisis experienced at the beginning of this year. Depending on the
severity of continued electricity shortfalls, the likelihood of a below potential
output performance this year remains high.
On the expenditure side, both household and government expenditure slowed
in 2007 due to a number of factors, including among others, the current tight
monetary conditions.
- 4 -
Despite the slowdown in overall spending, real gross capital formation or
investment remained strong in 2007, with indications of continued momentum
in the first quarter of 2008. Infrastructure development should result in
sustained high levels of capital formation. Such investment spending is in our
view destined to provide welcome momentum to growth in the medium to long
term. Following the words of the Governor in his recent speech, we will after
all see “better times” in the near term.
Leading indicator and inflation
South Africa is still recording the longest expansion phase of the business
cycle on record. The composite leading business cycle indicator points
towards a slowdown in the economy. This is by no means signalling prospects
of a recession, as some have inferred. Also, in my view the extent of the
current slowdown would not warrant the determination of an upper turning
point in the business cycle, at this point and time. Some evidence of a
recovery in the medium term, as I have earlier suggested, indeed exists.
The current trend of the leading business cycle is informed mainly by opinion
surveys, such as the business confidence index and interest rate sensitive
demand-side indicators, such as vehicle sales.
Factors such as electricity supply disruptions, declining household spending,
contracting business volumes and expectations of reduced company profits
contribute to the current negative sentiment in the economy. Justifiably so – I
must submit.
Inflation remains high due to petrol and food prices, among other factors, and
the targeted CPIX inflation rate is currently 10,4 per cent, far above the target
of 6 to 3 per cent. Wage settlements are drifting higher, as are inflation
expectations. These present a challenge for the country and the Bank.
- 5 -
Inflation is, however, projected to decline towards the target range in the final
quarter of 2009, as relatively tight monetary policies slow down underlying
inflationary pressures. CPIX inflation is likely to remain quite high in the next
few months – factoring in the recent trends in petrol prices and the under-
recovery of underlying fuel costs.
External sector
On the external accounts, merchandise imports continue to outstrip exports
resulting in a sizeable trade deficit. The trade deficit has thus widened
markedly in the first four months of this year.
Thus, the current-account deficit is likely to remain above 7 per cent of GDP in
the first half of this year, largely reflecting the impact of capital goods imported.
This may and should be viewed favourably going forward in terms of
investment momentum and its contribution to growth. Regardless, the ratio at
these levels is not viewed lightly or without due attention by the monetary
authorities.
Despite global financial market instability, non-residents continue to find value
in the South African domestic markets as evidenced by a general trend of net
inflows into equities and debt securities, although sometimes with short-term
reversals. This may be expected in a liquid, active market. Significant foreign
direct investment inflows have been recorded in the first quarter of 2008.
Unfortunately, in the short run, the yields on these securities coupled with
other interest payments on the country’s foreign debt continue to keep the
services account’s transactions on the external accounts in the red.
Continued accumulation of gross gold and other international reserves by the
South African Reserve Bank contributes to a favourable international liquidity
position. The gross reserves now exceed US$34 billion, more than four times
as much as in 2003.
- 6 -
On monetary developments and financial markets
I submit that a less accommodative monetary policy stance and stricter lending
standards have indeed contributed to a slowdown in credit extension by
financial institutions.
High inflation and volatility of the exchange value of the rand have been
reflected in high bond yields. Trading activity in both the equity and bond
markets remain firm, regardless of the release of worse-than-expected inflation
numbers.
Bond yields increased further to 11,50 per cent for the short-dated R153 and
9,82 per cent for the long-dated R157, yesterday. Compared to the current
repo rate of 11,50 per cent the rate on forward rate agreements most recently
amounted to 13,18 per cent, 13,20 per cent and 13,00 per cent for the 3 x 6, 6
x 9 and 9 x 12 FRA’s, respectively. This indicates expectations of further
increases in short-term rates.
Bond yields are also influenced by the current-account deficit and reliance on
portfolio capital flows. We are aware that the market has also taken
cognisance of the Bank’s interest in underlying inflation (CPIX excluding food
and petrol) which increased to 6,1 per cent most recently.
Higher commodity prices continue to lend support to the overall level of share
prices.
Property prices have decelerated sharply on account of reduced affordability
due to, among others, the simultaneous rise in house prices and interest rates.
- 7 -
Inflation outlook
The outlook for CPIX inflation deteriorated substantially since the beginning of
2008, rising from 8,8 per cent in January to 10,4 per cent in April 2008.
The main risk to the inflation outlook emanate from recent movements in food
price pressures and the escalation in fuel and energy prices. The recent trend
in rising actual rates of inflation has also caused inflation expectations to
accelerate sharply in the first quarter of 2008. This would most probably be
reflected in higher salary and wage demands.
International Brent crude oil prices have increased from an average of
US$92,8 per barrel in January 2008 to US$130,4 per barrel on 28 May 2008.
Domestic petrol prices (95 octane petrol) have accordingly increased from
R7,47 per litre at the beginning of January to R9,46 per litre in May and it is
anticipated to increase further in June on the basis of the current under-
recovery.
Food prices have risen substantially since the beginning of the year, reaching
15,9 per cent on a year-on-year basis in April 2008. The increase in food
prices is broad-based and primarily reflects the rising trends in international
grain prices and food production and distribution costs, as well as the
depreciation in the value of the Rand since the beginning of the year.
Electricity prices also pose a significant risk to the inflation outlook. The
National Energy Regulator of South Africa (NERSA) is due to make a decision
on the application by Eskom to raise electricity tariffs by more than the original
approved 14,2 per cent on 18 June 2008. In addition, the electricity price levy
of 2c per kWh announced in the Budget Policy Statement of February 2008,
and the announced increase in property taxes will add further pressure to
inflation.
- 8 -
Concluding remarks
Given these broad-based inflationary pressures, CPIX inflation is unlikely to
return to within the inflation target range before 2010. And the public, both of
the Republic and the Southern African region, expects the value of the Rand
currency to be protected, now and beyond 2010.
It is not in the best interest of the Bank to curb activity through painful policy
rate adjustments, but to provide a platform, among other agents, for another
prolonged and healthy economic cycle. Constraining inflation is what most
Central Banks world over, are mandated to do.
At the South African Reserve Bank we conduct Monetary Policy in the interest
of broader South African economic objectives – which are employment
creating growth and poverty alleviating goals. Upward adjustment of the policy
rate does not indicate a deviation by monetary authorities from these goals.
An understanding of the Bank’s role in this economy by the South African
society and its purpose to achieve what is in the best economic interest of this
country should be viewed in a positive light by the Public as a whole.
Unbridled price increases, as reflected in the basket of consumer goods and
services, go against the interest of economic growth and development and
must be resisted by the Bank and by all role-players in society. It must also be
remembered that high inflation punishes the poor disproportionately.
The Bank needs the support of your institution, of other formations of similar
standing, of the country’s political formations, unions and civil society to
continue to focus on curbing high rates of inflation, and maintaining the value
of the Rand.
I trust that the Bank can, at the least, count on the support of your institution in
fighting inflation – and can assure you that the MPC Policy decisions are
- 9 -
decided upon in a professional, non-sectarian, a-political, and more than
certain, in an environment that considers the micro and macroeconomic
welfare of all South Africans.
Thank you very much for your attention.
--- oOo ---