Titulo: Banking in Africa and its future outlook
Data: 2008-07-08
Palestrante (estimado): None
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2008/100
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2008/100/Africa+Banking+Congress+July+2008.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

BANKING IN AFRICA AND ITS FUTURE OUTLOOK
Address by Dr X.P. Guma, Deputy Governor, South African Reserve Bank,
to the African Banking Congress, 2008, Sandton Convention Centre,
Johannesburg, South Africa, 8 July 2008
1. Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, I have been asked to speak
today on Central Bank perspectives on the outlook for banking in Africa,
focusing in particular on the following issues: the role of central banks and
major banks in regional integration; latest trends and experiences, and
lessons learnt.
Having taken note of the formidable array of speakers who are to take to
the podium during the course of the day, I have taken the liberty to reduce
the scope of my remarks by focusing on the situation in South Africa and
the prospects for the Southern African region. Others will, no doubt,
enlighten us regarding developments elsewhere.
2. The role of Central Banks and major banks
South Africa currently has 20 registered banks, 14 local branches of
foreign banks and 46 representative offices of foreign banks, supervision
of banks being the responsibility of the Registrar of Banks, a constituent
component of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB). The relationship
between these two is described in the Banks Act 94 of 1990 in the
following terms (Chapter II.S4):
“The Reserve Bank shall, subject to the approval of the Minister (of
Finance) designate an officer or employee in its service as Registrar of
Banks, who shall perform, under the control of the said Bank and in
accordance with the directions issued by the Bank from time to time,
the functions assigned to the Registrar by or under this Act …”
The SARB in turn is defined in Section 223 of the Constitution of the
Republic of South Africa 1996 as “… the central bank of the Republic and
is regulated in terms of an act of Parliament”, and “the powers and
functions of the SARB are those customarily exercised and performed by
central banks …” (Section 225).
Five of the largest banks account for the greater share of the banking
sector assets of R2860.5 billion as at May 2008, a pattern which has been
consistent over time. The salient features of this banking sector are
summarised in Tables 1 and 2.
This outcome may be viewed in contrast to the situation described by Dr
A.J. Bruwer in his polemic, South Africa: A Case for a National Gold and
Banking Policy (1957), although echoes of the sentiments that he
expressed have some resonance in certain sections of contemporary
South Africa:
“… it becomes abundantly clear that the two British Imperial Banks …
have practically a monopolistic hold on the commercial banking of the
country and control over 82 per cent of its banking assets. The
imperial hold on the banking and currency structure of the country was
made practically complete in 1920 with the establishment of the South
African Reserve Bank ….” And, he continued:
“If South Africa today has a hopeless inferiority complex with regard to
her capacity to run her own banking and currency system along
national lines, the country cannot be blamed … (Preface)
Bruwer’s preferred outcome was stated thus:
“What is needed in South Africa more than a central bank (although
there is no harm in retaining a bank with independent central banking
powers in South Africa) is a powerful extra unit in the field of
commercial banking – a unit that will be able within a minimum of time
- 2 -
to enter the remotest hamlet in the country in competition with the two
all-powerful Imperial banks (p.192).
I have quoted Bruwer at length for two reasons; first to indicate the fact
that we must expect criticism to be directed at our financial systems from
time to time, more so during periods of economic stress. Central Banks, in
particular may be deemed to be purveyors of all sorts of undesired policies
and actions, some being more fantastic than others.
My second reason is to remind this heterogeneous group of eminent
persons with direct interest in the financial system that it is important to
take into account local concerns when imagining and implementing the
architecture of our financial infrastructure, subject always to the need to
ensure probity, efficiency and stability in the system as a whole. What
works well in one country during a particular period of time may not best
be suited to another country and may be less suited to local conditions as
time elapses. Stated differently, in the absence of uniform conditions,
local improvisations and adjustments are, of course, to be resorted to
depending upon factors such as the particular stage of development of a
country, the make-up of its banking and credit structure generally, and the
degree of organisation of its money market, inter alia.
At present, let it be stressed, South Africa has no inferiority complex with
regard to her capacity to run her own banking and currency system and
the authorities are alive to the need to do better. Let it be said also that
the banking system continues to facilitate intermediation between surplus
and deficit financial units – not by administrative diktat, as some would
prefer. Rather, allocative efficiency is sought through the price mechanism
which operates best at arms length. The role of the central bank is then
multi-faceted: in particular supervising the banks, large and small alike,
implementing monetary policy for the economy as a whole – within a
framework of inflation targeting – and maintaining the national payment
system.
- 3 -
2.1 Some recent developments
Three recent domestic developments warrant mention. The first
two have to do with legislation, whilst the third has to do with
competition.
As noted in the South African Reserve Bank’s Financial Stability
Review, March 2008, the Banks Amendment Act, No. 20 of 2007,
was promulgated and assented to in 2007 following extensive
consultation with relevant stakeholders over a number of years and
came into effect on 1 January 2008. The amended legal framework
gives effect to current international standards and best practice
relating to banking supervision and regulation, and in particular to
the new capital framework as envisioned in Basel II. In addition, the
financial services industry is currently being subjected to an
assessment conducted by the IMF and World Bank under the
Financial Sector Assessment Programme, or FSAP.
Second, as part of its efforts to improve access to finance, South
Africa is moving towards a co-operative banking regulatory
framework in order to advance the social and economic welfare of
South Africans. Significant progress has been made to date,
including the recent promulgation of the Co-operative Banks Act,
No. 40 of 2007. The applicable supervisory bodies are in the
process of establishing the required developmental and supervisory
structures. The Act and the Regulations are likely to be
implemented concurrently during 2008.
Third, the Competition Commission of South Africa has recently
completed an Enquiry into Competition in Banking : at present, only
the Executive Overview has been released and is currently being
studied.
- 4 -
Finally, in this regard, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS)
released its Annual Report last week, noting in particular the rapid
deterioration in the stability of financial markets during the past
year. Most notable, in the view of the BIS, was the “onset of turmoil
in the US market for sub-prime mortgages which rapidly affected
many other financial markets ….”
In the case of South Africa, however, the effects of this turmoil in
international financial markets, so far, have been indirect. They
have been felt primarily in the form of volatility in the domestic
financial markets and in the form of increased pricing for off-shore
funding.
In theory, international contagion could also be transmitted through
the international exposures of the South African financial system.
In the event, however, this has not materialised as the financial
sector had very little direct exposure to the US sub-prime market.
Moreover, as has been indicated earlier, the banking sector in
South Africa has capital in excess of the regulatory requirement,
operates within a regulatory environment which is fully compliant
with the Basel II regulatory framework: and is subject to robust
supervision by the Registrar.
3. Regional economic arrangements
As is well known, South Africa is a member of three regional organisations
in the Southern Africa region, these being the Common Monetary Area
(CMA) (with Lesotho, Namibia and Swaziland); the Southern African
Customs Union (SACU), with Botswana and the CMA countries; and the
Southern Africa Development Community, SADC, whose members include
all SACU members as well as Angola, Democratic Republic of Congo,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius, Mocambique, Tanzania, Zambia and
Zimbabwe.
- 5 -
The CMA, at present, allows each member to have its own currency, these
being pegged one-to-one to the South African Rand which circulates as
legal tender throughout the Area. Each member state, except South
Africa, is required to maintain foreign reserves equivalent in value to the
total amount of local currency issued. The reciprocal obligation of South
Africa is then to pay seignorage to the other countries in proportion to the
Rand circulating within their respective regions. For consistency,
moreover, exchange controls are harmonised throughout the region.
Most of the major South African banks have a presence in each of the
member countries of the CMA as indicated in table 3: but, as of now, none
of the home-grown banks in Lesotho, Namibia, and Swaziland have yet
established a presence in South Africa.
Regarding SACU, it is the case that negotiations leading to the current
arrangement and reserve-sharing formula were finalised in 2002; ratified
in a formal treaty in 2004 and the provisions were first implemented in
2005. Revenue, deriving in essence from the implementation of a
common external import tariff structure for the Union and from excise
taxes collected, is apportioned among the member states in accordance
with a formula which has three components: namely, a customs
component, an excise component and a development component. During
the three years of operation, South Africa’s contribution to the SACU
revenue pool has amounted to approximately 98 per cent whilst South
Africa has, in effect, retained the bulk of the excise component – which
typically amounts to about 50 per cent of the total; the balance has then
been transferred to the other SACU member states, constituting a charge
on the services account of South Africa’s balance of payments; an income
in the services account of the balance of payments accounts of the other
SACU member states. With imports rising rapidly in recent years, import
duties collected have also been buoyant and the total amount paid over to
the governments of Lesotho, Namibia and Swaziland has risen threefold
over the past five years.
- 6 -
Within SADC, recent developments have been guided by the
Memorandum of Agreement (MOU) on macro-economic convergence,
signed in August 2002 on the one hand; and the Regional Indicative
Strategy Development Plan (RISDP), on the other.
The MOU identifies the following indicators as convergence criteria and
proposes the timetable indicated in Table 4 for their achievement, whilst
Table 5 adumbrates the timetable for achievement of the quantitative
targets for the so-called secondary macro-economic indicators.
Stated in words, the SADC convergence criteria require member states to
achieve the following by 2018: an inflation rate of less than 3 per cent per
annum; a budget-deficit-to-GDP ratio of less than 3 per cent; a ratio of
public-sector debt to GDP of less than 60 per cent and a ratio of the deficit
on the current account of the balance of payments to GDP of less than 5
per cent. Table 5 can be interpreted in similar fashion, mutatis mutandis.
The desire for a stable macro-economic environment is one to which most
policy-makers would assent. Clearly, though, there will be a need to re-
assess the quantitative dimensions of the desired end-state if severe
macro-economic dislocation is to be avoided in the period which is to
extend beyond 2012, in terms of the SADC timetable.
Conclusion
To conclude:
1. South Africa has a well regulated banking system, well capitalised,
compliant with Basel II and largely unaffected by contagion arising from
the financial market turmoil which started in the sub-prime market of the
United States of America last year.
2. The relevant South African authorities maintain vigilance with regard to
further development of the banking and financial system. Evidence of this
- 7 -
is to be found in recent regulatory pronouncements, in particular changes
to the regulations under the Banks Act and legislation intended to extend
access to finance, or as Dr Bruwer would have it, to “enter the remotest
hamlet in the country …”
3. South Africa, today, does not have a hopeless inferiority complex with
regard to the capacity to run her own banking and currency system.
4. Regional integration is an objective of the governments of the Southern
African region and should provide further impetus for enhanced economic
growth and an environment in which existing and new banks, adhering to
the dictates of probity, can thrive through competition at arms-length
contributing to and being guided by market forces. The current uni-
directional flow of investments by banks surely presents a welcome
challenge to those entrepreneurs of lofty ambition.
5. In the absence of uniform conditions, monetary authorities in their
respective jurisdictions will have to improvise, adapting their practices to
local conditions. They must expect to be criticised, sometimes vilified for
doing their work, particularly during times of economic adjustment.
6. There is no short cut to development or to sustainable regional integration.
These take time, consistent application and nimble adaptation. So too
with banking in Africa.
- 8 -
TTTaaabbbllleee 111::: KKKeeeyyy bbbaaannnkkkiiinnnggg ssseeeccctttooorrr iiinnndddiiicccaaatttooorrrsss ---
MMMaaayyy 222000000888
Jan 2008 Feb 2008 Mar 2008 Apr 2008 May 2008
Total assets (R bn) 2 663.2 2 758.1 2 827.4 2 790.8 2 860.5
Total assets: year-on-year growth (%) 27.0 27.7 29.9 26.5 28.8
Gross loans and advances (R bn) 2 103.2 2 175.0 2 209.7 2 194.6 2 241.6
Gross loans and advances: year-on-year 19.2 19.3 19.3 17.4 19.2
growth (%)
Cost-to-income ratio (%) 47.0 54.3 46.7 48.1 50.6
Capital adequacy ratio (%) 11.69 11.94 12.19 12.34 12.39
Impaired advances* (R bn) 44.4 46.2 47.9 49.5 55.7
Impaired advances* as % of total loans and 2.0 2.0 2.2 2.3 2.5
advances
Specific credit impairments as % of impaired 39.7 40.6 40.7 40.3 37.3
advances
SSoouurrccee:: BBaannkk SSuuppeerrvviissiioonn DDeeppaarrttmmeenntt
** AAddvvaanncceess iinn rreessppeecctt ooff wwhhiicchh aa bbaannkk rraaiisseedd aa ssppeecciiffiicc iimmppaaiirrmmeenntt
2
- 9 -
TTTaaabbbllleee 222::: DDDiiissstttrrriiibbbuuutttiiiooonnn ooofff tttoootttaaalll bbbaaannnkkkiiinnnggg ssseeeccctttooorrr
aaasssssseeetttsss –––MMMaaayyy 222000000888
R bn %
Standard Bank 721.8 25.2
Absa 638.9 22.3
FirstRand 552.9 19.3
Nedbank 476.9 16.7
Investec 165.5 5.8
Other 304.5 10.7
Total banks 2,860.5 100.0
SSoouurrccee:: BBaannkk SSuuppeerrvviissiioonn DDeeppaarrttmmeenntt
3
- 10 -
TTTaaabbbllleee 333::: SSSooouuuttthhh AAAfffrrriiicccaaannn BBBaaannnkkk ppprrreeessseeennnccceee iiinnn
CCCMMMAAA aaannnddd SSSAAACCCUUU cccooouuunnntttrrriiieeesss ---MMMaaarrrccchhh 222000000888
BBaannkk
Standard Bank Absa FirstRand Nedbank
CCoouunnttrryy
As % of bank As % of bank As % of bank As % of bank
assets assets assets assets
Botswana1 0,99 - 6,8 -
Lesotho2 0,42 - 0,09 0,35
Namibia2 1,56 - 2,0 1,07
Swaziland2 0,36 - 0,18 0,26
SSoouurrccee:: BBaannkk SSuuppeerrvviissiioonn DDeeppaarrttmmeenntt
11 --SSoouutthheerrnn AAffrriiccaann CCuussttoommss UUnniioonn ((SSAACCUU))
22 --SSoouutthheerrnn AAffrriiccaann CCuussttoommss UUnniioonn ((SSAACCUU)) aanndd CCoommmmoonn MMoonneettaarryy AArreeaa ((CCMMAA))
4
- 11 -
TTaabbllee 44:: MMaaccrrooeeccoonnoommiicc ccoonnvveerrggeennccee ttaarrggeettss
Year 2008 2012 2018
Indicator
Inflation (% p.a.) <10 <5 <3
Deficit1/GDP (%) <5 <3 <3
Debt/GDP (%) <60 <60 <60
Current account2/GDP
(%) <9 <9 <3
Notes: 1. Deficitmeans the public sector deficit
2. External current account, excluding official transfers
Source: SADC Secretariat
July 2008
- 12 -
TTaabbllee 55:: OOtthheerr mmaaccrrooeeccoonnoommiicc ttaarrggeettss
Year 2008 2012 2018
Indicator
Economic growth
(% p.a.) 7 7 7
External reserves
(month of imports) 3 >6 >6
Central bank credit
to Government
(% of tax revenue) 10 5 5
Domestic saving/
GDP (%) 25 30 35
Domestic investment/
GDP (%) 30 30 30
Source: SADC Secretariat
July 2008
- 13 -
REFERENCES:
1. Bank for International Settlements (2008) 78th Annual Report.
2. Bruwer, A.J. (1957) South Africa : A Case for a National Gold and Banking
Policy, Cape Town, H.A.v.M.
3. South African Reserve Bank (various years), Financial Stability Review
4. South African Reserve Bank (various years), Quarterly Bulletin
- 14 -