Titulo: Remarks by Dr Mnyande, Chief Economist and Executive General Manager of the South African Reserve Bank, at the launch of the Financial Stability Review on 6 May 2009
Data: 2009-05-06
Palestrante (estimado): Mnyande
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2009/53
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2009/53/fsr-launch-speech-march-2009_1.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Remarks by Dr Mnyande, Chief Economist and Executive General
Manager
of the South African Reserve Bank, at the launch of the
Financial Stability Review on 6 May 2009
Invited guests, members of the press and colleagues from the South African
Reserve Bank.
It is my privilege to welcome you to the release of the latest Financial Stability
Review (FSR) of the Bank.
The purpose of this publication is to identify and analyse potential risks to South
Africa’s financial system stability, and to communicate such assessments in an
endeavour to stimulate serious debate about pertinent financial stability issues and
their implications for overall economic activity.
The Bank has been publishing the FSR on a six-monthly basis since March 2004,
making this the eleventh edition. However, with this edition the Bank enters a new
phase: it is the first time that the FSR is officially launched at a press conference.
This is in line with other major publications of the Bank, such as the Bank’s Quarterly
Bulletin, Monetary Policy Review and Annual Report.
Raising the profile of this publication in this current global environment gives the
Bank an additional tool and opportunity to communicate its views about the stability
of the South African financial system, which has, in the most recent years, become
critical to the understanding of the overall global financial system. The global
financial crisis, which started in mid-2007, has compelled the Group of Twenty (G-
20) countries, among others, to raise the level of transparency regarding financial
system arrangements.
Thus, this press conference serves as a concrete manifestation of the growing
importance of financial stability as a central bank function, alongside its conventional
and primary function of maintaining price stability. This greater emphasis on financial
stability is a global trend and one that we expect will change the way in which central
banks conduct their business. As we speak, internationally much attention is being
given to central banks’ role in promoting and preserving financial stability - in the
context of both supervision and policy. Various central banks have also restructured
and enhanced their legal mandates to give full effect to these responsibilities.
In a supervisory or macroprudential context, central banks, as agreed by both the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the Bank for International Settlements (BIS),
should have the capacity to
 identify systemic threats at an early stage;
 promote measures to reduce these threats;
 develop and test contingency plans and crisis preparedness; and
 in extreme cases, implement safety net measures to support systemically
important financial institutions, maintain confidence in financial markets and
restore the efficient functioning of markets.
In a policy context, a central bank’s financial stability function is complementary to,
rather than in conflict with, its monetary policy function. Greater emphasis on
financial stability issues certainly does not imply that the Bank would pursue these
objectives at the expense of price stability. The major central banks that have
intervened in unprecedented ways and to astounding amounts in markets in pursuit
of financial stability have categorically stated that these interventions should not be
inflationary, and proper exit strategies should be formulated in order to prevent them
from becoming so.
In our case, the Bank has increased the frequency of meetings of the Monetary
Policy Committee from every second month to monthly this year, in order to monitor
2
internationally and locally both the real and financial economic developments on a
more frequent basis. We are therefore simultaneously and continuously reviewing
the role that the Financial Stability Department plays in this process, and this was
one of the key topics for discussion at the recent Strategic Planning Session of the
executive and senior management of the Bank.
The financial stability and monetary policy functions of a central bank are
complementary, primarily due to the linkages that exist between the two: monetary
policy implementation becomes impossible in the absence of well-functioning
markets and an effective transmission mechanism. This is a topic for discussion at
the next monetary policy strategy meeting of the Bank, which will be held early in
June. Furthermore, recent experience internationally has shown the severity of the
cost associated with unsustainable asset bubbles when they burst.
It is for these reasons that monetary policy-makers here and elsewhere have to take
cognisance of systemic developments - such as unsustainable asset price increases
that do not reflect fundamentals, over-leveraging, liquidity pressures and excessive
credit growth. As mentioned earlier, the purpose of the FSR is to highlight any such
developments, and to review regulatory aspects that could impact on financial
markets. At this point, allow me to proceed with a short summary of the key issues
that are raised in this edition.
Since the release of the September 2008 FSR, the global financial crisis has
intensified. Many industrialised economies have fallen into recession and emerging-
market economies (EMEs) now appear much less immune to the effects of the
deepening recession in these major economies. Global deleveraging, sharp
declines in international trade and a so-called flight to quality by investors have
taken their toll on output growth and have markedly reduced investors’ demand for
EMEs’ financial assets.
3
Key risks in the global recessionary environment that are feeding back into the
financial system include a decline in net lending to households and businesses,
lower corporate profits, higher default rates, further losses in equity markets, weaker
property and commodity markets, and volatility in currency markets. Monetary
authorities in some industrialised countries have provided liquidity support and
reduced their policy rates drastically to help restore confidence and increase credit
extension, and several governments have announced fiscal stimulus packages to
support the crippled domestic demand.
The G-20 leaders (of which South Africa remains a key member) agreed on a Global
Plan for Recovery and Reform at the London Summit in early April 20091 to repair
the global financial system, restore confidence and lending, and to avoid a
prolonged deep global recession. This plan is also aimed at benefiting economic
growth in EMEs and in other developing countries, including those in Africa. The
G-20 meeting stressed specific economic, financial and social risks stemming from
the financial crisis, which are summarised in a box in the FSR on page 8.
The general conclusion of this edition of the FSR is that South African financial
markets have so far been spared the worst of the direct effects of the recent global
financial calamity. Analysis will show that the South African banks have maintained
levels of capital well in excess of the already prudent regulatory requirement, and
their degree of leverage and their off-balance-sheet risk exposures have been much
lower than those of the failed banks in other G-20 countries.
Evidence will also reveal that South African banks have primarily felt the impact of
the global financial crisis indirectly, through higher funding costs and increased
impairments. Higher funding costs and increased impairments are, however, also
attributable to the negative impact of the lower real economic activity on borrowers,
following years of high credit growth. Fortunately the South African banking sector
1 G-20 Communiqué from the London Summit. 2 April 2009. The Global Plan for Recovery and
Reform.
4
was further shielded from developments in global financial markets by its limited
exposure to foreign currency-denominated assets, and by its limited dependence on
foreign currency-denominated funding liabilities.
Notwithstanding this, conditions in the South African financial markets and banking
sector have deteriorated in recent months. Share prices on the JSE Limited have
declined, foreign portfolio investment flows reversed and impaired advances of
banks increased as the profitability of financial institutions declined somewhat.
However, these developments, as we are all aware, have mainly resulted from the
spill-over effects of the international financial crisis, rather than from direct exposure
to toxic assets from some major economies, liquidity squeezes in the domestic
banking system, malfunctioning South African financial markets, funding constraints
on banks, excessive leverage in the financial sector or the effect of currency
depreciation on foreign debt.
As evidenced in the recently released South African Reserve Bank Quarterly
Bulletin, the global economic slowdown has also impacted on real economic activity
in South Africa. South African financial and non-financial entities are experiencing
pressures as a result of the global financial turmoil and the slowdown in economic
activity. Some firms, particularly in mining and manufacturing and notably in the
motor industry, retrenched a significant number of employees in the first quarter of
this year – leading to an increase in the unemployment rate by 1,6 percentage points
from the fourth quarter of 2008 to 23,5 percent in the first quarter of this year.
In the fourth quarter of 2008 confidence in the financial sector dropped to its lowest
historical level and the business confidence level also declined significantly. In the
first quarter of 2009 though, this was ameliorated by factors such as reduced interest
rates, lower petrol prices, a relatively stable rand exchange rate and a stimulatory
National Budget announced in February 2009.
5
The uncertainty in financial markets and the more pronounced slowdown in the
economy from the third quarter of 2008 affected consumer confidence and
undermined the outlook for consumption. Consumption expenditure continued to be
subdued as households reduced spending and postponed their purchases of mostly
durable goods. Although there has been a moderation in the growth rate of
household debt, households remain highly indebted. Since the previous FSR, there
have been continuing signals of financial distress in the household sector which has
been mainly aggravated by further negative economic shocks or what seems to be a
sustained slowdown in the real economy. Nominal house prices have started to
decline amid high borrowing costs and more stringent lending criteria by financial
institutions. Fears continue of further retrenchments in certain sectors of the
economy. Recent reductions in interest rates may of course moderate the slowdown
in the property market.
An effective regulatory infrastructure is integral to the smooth functioning of a
financial system. The domestic regulatory infrastructure should keep abreast of
international developments in the financial system and, as such, is subject to
continued change and enhancement. Developments in the financial infrastructure
and regulatory environment that are likely to strengthen the resilience of the financial
system include new legislative developments to improve competition, consumer
protection and corporate governance. Implementation of relevant findings of the joint
IMF/World Bank 2008 Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) evaluation of
the South African financial system should further contribute to the resilience of the
South African financial system. An overview of the findings of the FSAP mission is
presented in a separate box on page 30 of the FSR.
The ongoing programme of local financial development to increase the robustness of
the financial system will, to a large degree, be influenced by the international agenda
of responses to the global financial crisis. Although the South African financial
system has been less affected, as mentioned earlier, South Africa has been active in
formal and informal international forums analysing the crisis, and will be expected to
6
respond to relevant regulatory changes deemed necessary to strengthen the global
financial system. This may entail matters such as the legal mandate, role and
responsibilities of authorities to support financial stability; the scope and design of
the financial safety net; cross-border co-operation between regulators;
countercyclical prudential requirements; and stronger macroprudential regulation
and analysis.
The national payment system (NPS) is a vital component of the broader financial
system, and its smooth and efficient functioning is regarded as essential for
supporting financial system stability in South Africa. A conceptual description of the
risk mitigation measures that have been built into the NPS is provided as a separate
section of the FSR.
The issue of how to promote financial stability through countercyclical policy
measures has become very topical in the current global circumstances and is
attended to at various levels in the international regulatory arena. It is increasingly
recognised that some of the prudential tools, valuation methods and accounting
practices that have been applied have tended to encourage procyclical behaviour,
that is, increasing the upswings and exacerbating the downswings. A more detailed
discussion on countercyclicality is presented in a box of this FSR issue on page 32.
Finally, the FSR contains a note that gives a South African perspective on the global
financial market turmoil and central bank intervention. Various aspects and
indicators of turmoil in international financial markets are compared to the South
African situation. The general conclusion is that, although conditions in the South
African financial markets and banking sector have deteriorated in recent months, the
international financial crisis has, to date, not resulted in severe instability in the
domestic financial system. The Bank did not have to inject additional liquidity into the
money market or provide special liquidity assistance to any of the major financial
and non-financial institutions in South Africa. Neither did it have to use foreign
7
exchange reserves to intervene in the foreign exchange market. Interbank markets
continued to function as normal, both in terms of prices (typically interest rates) and
volumes. South African banks were not as excessively geared as some of their
distressed counterparts in the developed countries, their off-balance-sheet
exposures were modest and their capital-adequacy ratios remained very healthy.
I have briefly highlighted the key issues raised in the FSR. Much more detailed
analyses are available in the publication itself, and I trust that you will find these
interesting, stimulating and relevant to the current environment.
Thank you
8