Titulo: Opening remarks by Dr M Mnyande, Chief Economist and Executive General Manager, at the Toronto Centre Seminar on strengthening financial stability arrangements, South African Reserve Bank College, 16 – 19 March 2009
Data: 2009-03-16
Palestrante (estimado): Dr
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2009/50
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2009/50/speech-toront-sarb-college-opening-remarks.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Opening remarks by Dr M Mnyande, Chief Economist and Executive General
Manager, at the Toronto Centre Seminar on strengthening financial stability
arrangements, to be held at the SARB College from 16 to 19 March 2009
Monday 16 March, 08:00
Mr Jorge Patino and the team from the Toronto Centre
Mr David Scott and his colleagues from the World Bank
Mr Andrew Gracie and his team from Crisis Management Analytics
Colleagues from the SADC central banks
Ladies and gentlemen
It is my privilege to officially welcome you to this seminar on Strengthening
Financial Stability Arrangements, which will be presented by the Toronto Centre
over the next four days. This is a first of its kind for Southern Africa, and we are
most grateful to the World Bank’s First Initiative for its assistance in co-sponsoring
this event with the South African Reserve Bank.
Having gone through the preparatory material, you should now be aware that this
programme differs somewhat from the typical seminar, in particular with regards to
the crisis simulation exercise that will be conducted on the third day. This exercise
was developed by Crisis Management Analytics, a specialised consultancy with
expertise in such events, and we have a number of highly-experienced role-players
to make the exercise realistic and guide us through our parts.
It somewhat struck me, that we are indeed fortunate in Southern Africa to practice
crisis handling in a simulated exercise - in the current global financial crisis - where
others have to do it in real life! It surely is an opportunity to sharpen our awareness
and our ability to act efficiently and appropriately, should disaster strike our shores.
The South African golf player Gary Player has a famous saying: “The more I
practice, the luckier I become”. I suspect there is a lot of truth in this expression that
in my view also applies handsomely to handling of a crisis. In a sense the more
one practices one’s skills to react appropriately to a crisis trigger event, the luckier
one becomes, either in averting a full-blown crisis, or in facilitating the least
disruptive and costless resolution.
The veracity of the argument that “Practicing” a crisis creates an awareness of
episodes that could go wrong, and a clumsy handling of events could degenerate
into systemic disasters and thus a crisis, is unquestionable. I expect that everyone
participating in this programme today should, at the end of it, have a serrated
sensitivity to all the issues that should be considered in the handling of a crisis, and
more specifically, a financial crisis.
It is easy, after an event, to point out flaws that were made in the handling of a crisis
situation; for example, in the case of the failure of Lehman Brothers. This and other
examples, I believe, will be covered extensively during the course of this seminar. It
is argued that “the perfect policy makers," if there is anything of the sort, are called
“Could Have” and “Should Have”. Clearly, as we all know and are aware, in the
region we won’t have the comfort and wisdom of an after event in a crises situation
that we may still have to resolve.
Still, I subscribe, unambiguously, that there is a lot that need to be studied from the
mess up of the others. Misdeeds by the major financial markets and institutions
observed in the recent past, as well as the techniques and/or methodologies that
can be applied in identifying potential weaknesses in the financial system, will be
thoroughly covered in the various presentations, discussions and case studies over
the next few days.
Allow me then, here and now, to say that I was heartened by the enthusiasm we
encountered for this event. I am very much aware of the fact that the South African
2
Reserve Bank had to do some serious negotiating with the Toronto Centre to allow
at least two participants from each country in SADC that indicated the need to
participate. Despite the relatively short notification, the programme was over-
subscribed and we had to decline - inadvertently - some participants from the rest of
the continent.
In earnest, this gives us assurances that the issue of crisis readiness and the
strengthening of financial stability mechanisms are high on the list of priorities
among central banks in the region, even though we may have escaped the worst of
the direct effects of the global financial crisis, SO FAR.
In advance, I would like to thank all the presenters, programme leaders, moderators
and co-sponsors on behalf of the Governor, Deputy Governors, the staff of the South
African Reserve Bank and indeed the Committee of Central Bank Governors in
SADC for bringing this programme to Southern Africa. A hearty welcome also to all
the participants - may you truly find the next four days an enriching experience.
Thank you.
3