Titulo: Remarks by Dr Monde Mnyande, Advisor to the Governor and Chief Economist of the South African Reserve Bank, presented at the Leadership Forum of Airports Company South Africa held at the OR Tambo Sun International Hotel on 12 March 2010
Data: 2010-03-12
Palestrante (estimado): Monde Mnyande
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2010/71
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2010/71/remarks-by-dr-monde-mnyande.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

1
Remarks by Dr Monde Mnyande, Advisor to the Governor and Chief Economist
of the South African Reserve Bank, presented at the Leadership Forum of
Airports Company South Africa held at the
OR Tambo Sun International Hotel on
12 March 2010
1. Introduction
The improving global economic recovery provides a favourable backdrop to
my remarks today and I will give a brief overview of these developments and
then turn to domestic economic developments and the outlook for the South
African economy. I also wish to avail myself of this opportunity to clarify
recent key topical issues related to the South African Reserve Bank. And
finally I will explain in some detail the Outreach Programme initiated by the
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, Ms Gill Marcus.
2. International and domestic economic developments
Although projected medium-term growth in the global economy may be
somewhat lower than in previous expansions, the IMF has forecasted in its
January 2010 update a stronger and more durable recovery than previously
expected. There are strong indications that in most developed countries, the
negative feedback loops between consumer demand and financial markets
have reversed.
Pent-up demand is beginning to filter through to the real sector and this has
been helped along by short- and long-term interest rates in major developed
markets that are still at their lowest levels on record. The significant fiscal
stimulus in many of these countries is also likely to continue for some time,
although in a number of countries increasing emphasis is being placed on
appropriate exit strategies from the extraordinary and unprecedented crisis-
related intervention policies.
2
There are continued signs that the domestic economic recovery is under way
following the much improved GDP growth rate for the fourth quarter of last
year. However, the recovery is still expected to remain relatively subdued and
below the potential growth rate of the economy for some time.
Following a two-year period of contraction in real retail trade, with a decrease
of 5 per cent in 2009 as a whole, indications are that retail trade and new
vehicle trade, in particular, are recovering from earlier levels. The more
positive outlook is in line with the continued positive trends seen in the
composite leading business cycle indicator of the Bank, which increased
strongly in November and December 2010. The coincident indicator also
exhibited a slight upward movement and, based on preliminary data available
for January 2010, the leading indicator is expected to have increased further.
This, once again, signals a positive economic performance going forward.
These trends are also in line with the more positive outlook among private-
sector institutions, as reflected in the RMB/BER business confidence index
which rose to an 18-month high in the first quarter of 2010. The Kagiso
Purchasing Manager’s Index (PMI) also rose strongly in February to 60.4
index points, indicating that the manufacturing sector continued to be the
bedrock of the overall economic growth recovery in the first quarter of 2010.
The effect of the interest rate reductions since December 2008 is gradually
impacting the South African housing market as reflected by the recent
reversal of the tide in domestic house prices. As a result, the year-on-year
rate of change in the average price of houses in the middle segment of the
market, as measured by Absa, improved from a negative 4,2 per cent in April
2009 to a positive 5,1 per cent in January 2010. Similarly, the year-on-year
rate of change in the average house price, as measured by First National
Bank, also swung around from negative to positive rates of change. The rate
of decline in the Standard Bank median house price index also moderated.
Turning now to wage-related matters, according to Andrew Levy Employment
Publications, a labour consultancy, the average wage settlement rate in
collective bargaining agreements amounted to 9,3 per cent in 2009, compared
with 9,8 per cent in 2008. Wage increases were below inflation in 2008, but in
3
2009 the average wage settlement rate again exceeded targeted inflation by
2,2 percentage points, adding to the real take-home pay of the gainfully
employed working men and women of our Republic.
The deceleration in the rate of increase in nominal remuneration per worker in
the formal non-agricultural sector, together with an improvement in
productivity, resulted in a moderation in the rate of increase in the cost of
labour per unit of production, amounting to a year-on-year rate of 5,7 per cent
in the third quarter of 2009.
Growth over twelve months in the broadly defined money supply (M3)
decelerated throughout 2009 and reached an all-time low of 0,6 per cent in
November 2009, before accelerating to 1,6 per cent in December. The weak
M3 growth continued to reflect, in part, the current phase of the business
cycle characterised by lower levels of economic activity and subdued levels of
household incomes and corporate profits.
Twelve-month headline CPI inflation decelerated to rates approximating the
upper limit of the inflation target range of 6 per cent in November and
December 2009. Targeted headline inflation registered an annual average of
7,1 per cent in 2009, down from 11,3 per cent in 2008. In January 2010
headline CPI inflation amounted to 6,2 per cent. Despite this moderating
trend, prices in eight of the twelve categories of consumer items still rose at
rates in excess of the upper limit of the inflation target range; three of those
categories registered year-on-year increases in excess of 10 per cent in
January 2010. Nevertheless, headline inflation is expected to return to within
the inflation target range in March 2010, and to remain within the target range
during the forecast period.
CPI administered price inflation recorded a year-on-year rate of 14,5 per cent
in January 2010, following price increases of 29,6 per cent in transport costs,
essentially stemming from petrol price increases, 15 per cent in the housing
and utilities components (due to electricity price increases amounting to 26,8
per cent), as well as education services costs rising at a rate of 10,4 per cent.
When the effect of petrol is excluded from the calculation of administered
4
prices, this year-on-year rate amounted to a still high 10,8 per cent in January
2010.
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has left the repurchase rate
unchanged since August 2009. While cost-push pressures in the economy,
particularly electricity price increases, posed the biggest upside risk to the
inflation outlook, the MPC decided to keep the monetary policy stance
unchanged at its previous meeting, because the risks to the inflation outlook
appeared to be fairly evenly balanced. The real repurchase rate, or
repurchase rate adjusted for the Reuters one-year-ahead targeted inflation
forecast, declined considerably during the past year and reached 1,2 per cent
in January 2010, indicating a more accommodative monetary policy stance.
The Bank’s forecast at the time of the January 2010 MPC meeting projected
GDP growth to average 2,0 per cent in 2010 and 3,0 per cent in 2011. Given
the improving global outlook, the forecast by National Treasury at the time of
the Budget in mid-February 2010 projected GDP growth to average 2,3 per
cent in 2010 and 3,2 per cent in 2011.
3. The concept of shareholding in the South African Reserve Bank
There has been much discussion in the media about the private shareholders
of the South African Reserve Bank following on comments by the Secretary-
General of the Governing Party Mr Gwede Mantashe. There still appears to
be a lot of uncertainty notwithstanding a press release by the Bank on 25
January 2010 to clarify the matter.
To put my remarks in perspective, the central banks of, among others, Italy,
Japan, Pakistan and South Africa, are institutions with shareholders other
than their respective governments. The Bank is an institution created by
statute, with the status of an independent legal person, which may not be
liquidated other than by an Act of Parliament. Its independence is
entrenched in the Constitution and it is not owned by anyone but by South
5
Africans. In that sense it belongs to the country as a whole and control of the
SARB is exercised between its shareholders and Government in a manner
whereby the latter, in normal circumstances, may exercise ultimate control
over the SARB. Furthermore, the SARB Act does not grant shareholders any
authority to remove directors. By virtue of the fact that the Bank is a statutory
institution, the shareholders are also unable, by means of a resolution or
otherwise, to amend or change the Bank’s constitution.
The SARB Act determines that the Bank shall be managed by the Board and
that the Governors and Deputy Governors must devote the whole of their time
to the business of the Bank. The Board consists of a Governor, three Deputy
Governors and three other directors, all appointed by the President of the
Republic (after consultation with the Minister of Finance and the Board), and
seven other directors, appointed by the shareholders. Individual shareholders
are prevented from exercising undue influence over the control of the SARB
by virtue of the prescription that no shareholder may hold more than 10 000
shares in the Bank. They also receive a fixed dividend at a rate of 10 cents
per annum on the value of their shares held, provided that profits are realised.
Voting is restricted to one vote for every 200 shares held, with a maximum of
50 votes per individual shareholder, which votes may be exercised at
meetings of shareholders of the Bank.
The concept of shareholding in the Bank is based exclusively on principles of
shared community representation and participation in the oversight of the
Bank, for purposes of increased independence, transparency and
accountability, in the ultimate interest of the general public of the RSA. SARB
shareholders should therefore at all times exercise their powers in accordance
with these principles and avoid any actions that could be construed as an
attempt by them to abuse their undue powers for purposes of self-interest and
own enrichment. The Bank has a unitary board structure.
6
4. The mandate of the South African Reserve Bank
On 16 February 2010 government clarified and extended the mandate of the
Bank. The Minister of Finance’s open letter to the Governor of the Bank
noted the constitutional objective of the Bank. The Bank’s primary objective is
to protect the value of the currency in the interest of balanced and sustainable
growth. It was also confirmed that the Bank should continue to pursue a
target of 3 to 6 per cent for headline consumer price inflation, and should do
so within a flexible inflation-targeting framework.
The letter reaffirmed the flexibility afforded the Bank in reacting to current and
expected supply-side shocks. The flexible inflation-targeting framework
involves a focus on a medium-term time horizon in getting back to the target if
the economy experiences an inflation shock, thereby avoiding unnecessary
instability in output and interest rates.
Policy responses should have due regard to the factors that might impact on
the attainment of balanced and sustainable growth, such as the source of the
inflation shock, magnitude of the gap between actual and potential economic
growth, credit extension and asset bubbles, employment, and the stability and
competitiveness of the exchange rate.
The events of the past three years have, once again, highlighted the
importance of financial stability. The letter reaffirmed the role of the Bank in
overseeing and maintaining financial stability and, in the aftermath of the
global financial crisis, has now also made this financial stability role an explicit
part of the Bank’s mandate.
5. ACSA’s tariffs
Allow me to make some brief, and somewhat uncomfortable, remarks about
ACSA’s application for a tariff increase. Recalling ACSA’s initial request for a
132,9 per cent increase, submitted in September 2009, and the Regulating
Committee’s 59,9 per cent proposal in late January 2010, these numbers
7
didn’t and or don’t speak easily with the 3–6 per cent inflation target set by
government, which the Bank pursues, regardless of the motives behind.
Unfortunately one must point out that such high increases, including the above
20 per cent Eskom price increases, are bad for the economy, inflation and
inflation expectations, and are unquestionably not ideal from a central bank’s
perspective.
However, we have noted that ACSA has undertaken huge capital expansion
projects and, for the good of our nation state, these have to be paid for. The
Bank also recognises the need for any enterprise to conduct its finances in a
sustainable way. Nevertheless, the airport infrastructure will be there for a
number of decades, and the Bank would argue that the tariff increases related
to the cost of such assets should be phased-in gradually rather than being
front-loaded.
6. The South African Reserve Bank Outreach Programme
Throughout the world, the functions and roles of central banks have come
under the spotlight following the global financial crisis. In an effort to open up
communication lines and quell misconceptions about what central banks can
and cannot do, the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank has
embarked on an Outreach Programme, led by myself and a team of the
Bank’s devoted economists. Through this initiative the Bank endeavours to
improve the interaction with different sectors and groups in the South African
economy. Through these engagements we seek to obtain a deeper
understanding of the views held by various stakeholders through interactive
discussions.
The SARB regards communication as an integral part of its business and an
important instrument in carrying out the government’s mandate. The recent
global financial crisis and the subsequent economic recession have spawned
unprecedented worldwide policy debates. Central banks find now, more than
ever, the need to reach out and actively engage with stakeholders.
8
Areas of discussion in the Outreach Programme include policy-making and
socio-economic issues. The Bank already employs various tools, including a
wide range of regular and ad hoc publications, speeches to various groups,
biannual monetary policy forum meetings hosted by members of the M P C in
all provinces, and various forms of interaction through the media. This
programme will add to these ongoing initiatives.
The Bank has segmented the full spectrum of stakeholders and has in place
dedicated economists per segment in order to optimise and strengthen its
bilateral relationships with the stakeholders. The sectors include corporate
economists and market analysts, the labour movement and social sector, the
financial services sector, commerce and industry, and agriculture.
The critical functions performed by the SARB place it at the centre of the
South African economy. We are, and have been, very much aware of the fact
that the decisions we take and implement impact on all South Africans. As a
consequence, we see communication with the widest possible range of
stakeholders as part of our responsibilities, and thus look forward to working
with you in this regard.
The Outreach Programme of the SARB strives to improve transparency in
terms of the following:
• Create awareness and understanding of the SARB’s contribution to the
national agenda through its proper implementation of monetary policy
• Enhance the SARB’s understanding of the economy
• Debate the implications of domestic and global economic developments
• Focus discussions on coordinating, sequencing, complimentarity and
cohesion of economic policy
• Emphasise the need for and importance of good quality economic data for
monetary policy implementation.
9
5. Conclusion
Fundamental to our sources of economic growth are labour and education. As
Governor Gill Marcus stated in her bilateral meeting with the Young
President’s Organisation (YPO), yesterday, “…the SARB identifies with the
pursuit for a common national vision and serves in the interest of the nation.”
It is essential that the business community, government, the labour movement
and communities together focus on children and youth development.
She challenged us to think about the following questions: How do we create a
sense of self-worth, especially among children and the youth, a majority of
whom neither have the base nor the means? How realistic are the aspirations
of the majority of South African children and what role can we play in helping
the youth to be ready to identify and seize opportunities and become
responsible and productive citizens of the future? For South Africa to realise a
knowledge-based, competitive economy, it needs an educated, skilled and
informed populace, not a certificated one. As Michael Spence summed it up
in his book1 (1974) “education may be unproductive in itself - if the social rate
on investment in schooling to society as a whole maybe zero.”
The Bank identifies with Eustace Davies’ (2003)2 assertion that
“We cannot allow such a large number of South Africans to remain
unemployed: we need to take decisive action now to promote job
creation, and to offer the hope of economic betterment to the millions
who are jobless and unskilled.”
1 Spence, A. M. Market Signalling: Informational Transfer in Hiring and Related Screening Processes.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 1974.
2 Davies, E. Jobs for the Jobless: Special Exemption Certificates for the Unemployed. The Free Market
Foundation, Johannesburg. December 2003.
10
For us to realise the national vision, employers and workers have to strive to
find a common understanding. I urge business in particular, that where
opportunities to employ people present themselves, business should not be
afraid to take into service more people; capitalisation of production does not
always have to be the first option as a way of avoiding unionised labour.
Employers should seek to engage with workers and unions to enlighten them
about how business works and why it is pursued in a particular way. These
efforts will assist to build trust and to open communication lines.
Finally, I would like to wish ACSA every success with the important
responsibilities related to the upcoming 2010 FIFA World Cup. The sterling
work that has been done in ensuring timely completion of world-class airport
facilities deserves much praise and ACSA has, in this way, made a huge
contribution to the improvement of South Africa’s infrastructure. This will,
without doubt, form an important part of the base that is required for
sustainable economic growth and development in the years ahead.
I thank you.