Titulo: Address by Dr Monde Mnyande, Advisor to the Governor and Chief Economist, South African Reserve Bank (SARB), at the Annual Savings Workshop, hosted by the South African Savings Institute at the South African Reserve Bank Conference Centre in Pretoria, 2 September 2010
Data: 2010-01-02
Palestrante (estimado): Monde Mnyande
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2010/75
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2010/75/address-by-dr-monde-mnyande.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The role of monetary policy in influencing savings behaviour
in the South African economy
Address by Dr Monde Mnyande, Advisor to the Governor and
Chief Economist, South African Reserve Bank (SARB), at the
Annual Savings Workshop, hosted by the South African
Savings Institute at the South African Reserve Bank
Conference Centre in Pretoria, 2 September 2010
Introduction
It is an honour for me to partake in the proceedings of the day at
this Annual Savings Workshop for 2010 which marks the climax of
the National Savings Awareness campaign for this year. My
primary objective today is to elaborate on the role that monetary
policy play and can play in influencing savings behaviour in the
South African economy. I will also highlight some pertinent issues
pertaining to fiscal policy in shaping the savings environment.
My presentation today will commence with a description of the
concept of savings, followed by a discussion of the longer-term
evolution of savings behaviour in the South African economy,
focussing not only on the overall savings rate, but also dealing with
2
savings outcomes of the private sector and general government. I
will furthermore deal with savings behaviour of economic agents in
their effort to maximise utility over their life-cycle, against the
background of monetary policy intervention in contributing to a
sound financial system. Being critically important in shaping the
environment within which savings behaviour takes place, the role
of fiscal policy will be dealt with. My presentation will thus
conclude with some general thoughts on how to raise the absolute
level of savings in the country.
The concept of savings defined
In national accounts terminology, savings is the net surplus of
income over consumption, or stated differently, the amount of
resources or income produced in the economy in a given period,
that is not consumed immediately but put to use in a way that will
provide returns to the economy in future. A relatively moderate
level of domestic savings could reduce a country’s rate of
investment, restrain the rate of economic growth and increase a
country’s vulnerability to international capital movements of the
type that was experienced during the most recent global financial
crisis.
In an open economy such as South Africa’s, investment equals the
sum of national savings and the net surplus of imports over
exports. The import surplus represents the gap between the value
of South Africa’s overall spending and its overall production, or the
amount of investment not financed by domestic savings. The
import surplus is in essence the accumulation of foreign claims on
3
South Africa’s assets, or the degree to which non-residents
purchase new domestic capital.
In general, the spending and saving behaviour of individuals is
determined by various factors such as their material and social
needs, traditions, standard of living, existing indebtedness, net
worth, disposable income, the stance of the business cycle,
institutional and regulatory considerations and fiscal and monetary
policy. In a savings deficit country such as ours, where domestic
absorption is in excess of income, a deficit on the current account
of the balance of payments is recorded. Conversely, a savings
surplus country exports its surplus by running a current account
surplus.
The evolution of savings outcomes in the South African
economy
When expressed as a percentage of gross domestic product,
gross saving in the South African economy averaged around 22
per cent in the period from 1960 to 1999. However, a clear
downward trend became evident in the aggregate saving rate
since the 1990s. The average saving rate in the period 1985 to
1999 fell to around 18 per cent from around 23 per cent in the
period from 1960 to 1972 and 25 per cent in the period from 1973
to 1978. During the period 1979 to 1984 the average savings rate
amounted to 27 per cent when savings behaviour was strongly
4
influenced by wind-fall profits of gold-mining companies when the
price of gold reached exceptionally high levels. By contrast, the
national savings performance during the 1990s deteriorated
substantially to around 16 per cent, remaining broadly at this level
in recent years.
Various reasons can be advanced for the decline in the saving
rate. The decline in the saving rate in the 1980s and 1990s
resulted primarily from slow economic growth and rising tax and
real interest burdens. In an effort by individuals to maintain their
lifestyles, they saved less. When income growth picked up slowly
from the mid-1990s, it was accompanied by an increased
redistribution drive, working in favour of higher consumption,
preventing much of a savings revival. Only from 2003 has much
more vigorous economic and income growth been restored, but
still this was not accompanied by much of a savings renewal. Two
main reasons can be advanced for the savings rate remaining
suppressed. Firstly, the increase in tax burdens as well as
increased government spending with a redistribution bias,
favoured household consumption rather than savings. Secondly,
the unfriendly tax regime towards savings encouraged the middle
class households to rather channel income to corporate entities.
Also, capital gains tax encouraged middle class households to
accumulate their investments in asset markets i.e. houses and
equities. Instead of liquidating such assets to finance
consumption, they escape capital gains tax by not selling their
assets. In the process households boost their net worth, which
can be used to negotiate access to credit. Thus households still
5
save, except they no longer do so out of income but rather in ways
which fall outside the national accounting sense of savings.
In the years leading up to 2008 foreign capital inflows and an
improving fiscal balance, enabled a significant increase in
investment’s share of GDP. While gross national saving as a
share of GDP has declined to an average of 14,6 per cent since
2005, gross capital formation has risen to an average of about 20
per cent of GDP over the same period. The difference, after
accounting for the change in gold and other foreign reserves, is
foreign saving or the so-called net capital inflow from the rest of
the world that finances the remainder of South Africa’s capital
formation. Net capital inflow from the rest of the world has in our
view enabled South Africa to finance significantly greater levels of
capital formation than would have been the case if it were relying
solely on national savings.
A country’s most important source of financing usually comes from
national saving in the domestic economy that originates in both the
private and government sectors. Gross private saving, being the
sum of saving by households and businesses, declined
significantly in recent years, dropping from a ratio of 19,1 per cent
of GDP in 1996 to only 10,6 per cent of GDP in 2007 before
recovering to 15,9 per cent in 2009. The main reason for the
decline between 1996 and 2007 was the significant decline in
household saving.
A rising propensity to consume over the past two decades was
reversed somewhat in 2008 and 2009 as the declines in
6
employment, home values, investor portfolios and uncertainties
surrounding retirement plans contributed to a marked improvement
in household saving.
A strong increase in the ratio of household debt to disposable
income of households occurred in recent years. Empirical
evidence reveals that up until 2008, both households and non-
financial corporations in South Africa built up their financial
balance sheets via increased borrowing. This led to more
pronounced financial exposure of households and companies
alike. The increased borrowing has financed both higher financial
investment and a growing net financing requirement, reflecting
continued investment in excess of savings. In 2008, the tide
turned, and borrowing by both households and companies fell
back somewhat. The expansion of the financial balance sheets
has however led to more exposure to financial market
developments. In turn, this has increased the interplay between
the financial and real sides of the economy. Moreover, it also
influences the transmission of monetary policy to the real
economy.
Sound saving decisions, like all resource allocation decisions, are
best taken in an environment of price and financial stability. The
contribution of monetary policy to saving lies in ensuring price
stability and financial stability in the interest of balanced and
sustainable growth and development. Domestic saving and capital
inflows from abroad tend to thrive in economies that are
characterised by price stability such as ours.
7
When analysing the relationship between gross saving as a ratio of
GDP and the prime overdraft rate, it is clear that the trend in the
saving ratio does not appear to have reacted much to shorter-term
movements in interest rates. However, when interest rates are
kept too low for too long - about which the Bank of International
Settlements sounded a warning in its 2009/2010 annual report – it
will inevitably distort economic activity, as was the case in a
number of countries during the period of rapid global growth. Too
low interest rates slow the process of restoring balance sheets by
keeping asset prices artificially inflated. If interest rates are kept at
levels that are too low they also penalise saving, thus prolonging
the process of rebuilding balance sheets.
Monetary policy and savings behaviour
The impact of monetary policy on saving is unpredictable and at
times perverse. For instance, when lowering the policy rate,
economic activity could be stimulated, leading to increased
incomes and saving. Persons saving to accumulate a certain
amount at a certain time, i.e. target savers, will have to save more
of their current income to compensate for lost interest when
interest rate are lowered. Conversely, higher interest rates may
not necessarily lead to increased saving over the short term if
growth and incomes are constrained in the process. Saving is
best promoted through lasting coherent structures and sound mix
of policies than through short-term orientated interventions.
Though monetary policy can influence real economic activity in
several ways, changes in household’s balance sheets may have
8
implications for the way that a change in policy-controlled interest
rates affects output and the Reserve Bank’s ultimate objective,
namely price stability. Monetary policy affects the economy
directly through the impact of market interest rates on expenditure.
However, changes in the repurchase rate can have additional
effects through the movements induced in asset values and
balance sheets. When long-term interest rates decline in response
to a change in the monetary policy stance, this will result in an
increase in asset values and, accordingly, in household wealth.
Consequently, a higher level of wealth should enable households
to reduce their saving and increase their consumption.
Fiscal policy shaping the savings landscape
Turning now to fiscal policy and its contribution to establishing an
environment which is conducive to increased savings behaviour.
During the years leading up to the global financial crisis when the
economy was performing well, South Africa’s national debt
obligation was meaningfully reduced. This enabled a significant
countercyclical response to the recessionary conditions that
prevailed during the latter half of 2008 and the first half of 2009.
In an effort to act in a countercyclical manner during 2008 and
2009, fiscal policy focused almost exclusively on stimulating gross
domestic expenditure. As a consequence, the downward trend in
total national government debt as a percentage of gross domestic
product increased in 2009, following an extended period of decline.
9
During the past two years, countercyclical expenditure growth has
been particularly strong as indicated by government’s share of
GDP rising from 28,5 per cent in 2007/08 to 34,1 per cent in
2009/10. Relatively low public debt levels created the so-called
fiscal space, that enabled the country to sustain public spending
and raise infrastructure investment within an environment of
reduced tax revenues.
Government’s stated intention in the 2010 budget is to manage
public finances along a trajectory that will return the fiscus to a
sustainable position. The deficit is projected to continue trending
downwards as spending growth moderates and revenue continues
to rise. Over the next three years public spending is projected to
grow by about 2 per cent on average in real terms compared with
average real growth of 7,2 per cent in the preceding three years.
Non-interest expenditure is projected to decline over the forecast
period and rising budget revenue is envisaged to lead to a
narrowing of the primary budget deficit over the next three fiscal
years.
The public sector borrowing requirement remains at significantly
higher levels than in recent years over the forecast period due to
countercyclical widening of the general government deficit and
increased infrastructure spending. Most of the borrowing
requirement is to be financed by domestic savings over the
forecast period. Borrowing in the foreign capital market is,
nevertheless, to be stepped up to between US$2 billion and US$3
billion per year.
10
Based on National Treasury’s real GDP growth estimates, the
central forecast is for South Africa’s net loan debt to rise to 44 per
cent of GDP in 2015/16 and to decline gradually thereafter. While
National Treasury’s assumptions produce a reasonably favourable
fiscal outlook, lower economic growth outcomes and higher fiscal
deficits pose significant risks to the outlook, and could be viewed
as negative for savings going forward.
In the years leading up to 2008, foreign capital inflows and an
improving fiscal balance, enabled a significant increase in the
investment’s share of GDP. To ensure that a growing debt
burden does not crowd out spending on development priorities,
government has embarked on a controlled reduction of the deficit.
Tax and spending plans have accordingly been adjusted
significantly to achieve a sustainable fiscal balance. The solution
required for ensuring a durable economic recovery, lies in the
restoration of balance sheets.
Thoughts on how to raise the absolute level of savings in the
country
The savings behaviour of economic agents is to a large extend
subject to institutional and structural factors within an economy.
Key to any environment which is conducive to positive savings
behaviour is the absence of negative real interest rates, giving rise
to consumption behaviour being financed by “cheap” money. An
environment which is characterised by low and stable inflation
gives rise to more sound savings decisions, and accordingly
enables better resource allocation. Pertinent to the promotion of
11
saving is the absence of punitive taxation on the returns to saving.
The excessive reliance on short-term monetary policy measures to
control savings should be avoided, due to possible perverse
reaction to such measures, as already indicated earlier in my
presentation.
The earlier implementation of the National Credit Act provides for
the protection of consumers in the sense that it guards them from
the excessive uptake of credit, steering them away from over-
indebtedness, motivating own savings behaviour. The
establishment of a compulsory social security and retirement
savings scheme for all citizens will greatly enhance the
accumulation of savings in the country. The avoidance of large
budget deficits by government will be conducive to prudent savings
behaviour. Furthermore, the establishment of investment-friendly
savings tools such as the RSA Retail Bonds initiative should be
encouraged and supported. It goes without saying that sound and
trustworthy saving institutions form the back bone of any
sustainable savings drive in a country.
In summary, in order to ensure sufficient financing for higher levels
of investment associated with robust economic growth, the
domestic saving ratio must improve significantly in coming years.
For consumers and businesses alike, it implies that they will have
to borrow or emulate the “Asian saving culture” and save more of
their incomes. A higher domestic saving ratio will ensure that
capital formation will prove more sustainable than in the past. To
this end, monetary policy will have to continue to play the ever
12
important role of stabilising output at high but non-inflationary
levels.
I thank you.
A brief explanation of real interest rates
The real interest rate is more accurately defined by the Fisher equation, named for Irvin
Fisher, one of the great monetary economists of the twentieth century. The Fisher equation
states that the nominal interest rate equals the real interest rate plus the expected rate of
inflation
Rearranging the terms, we find that the real interest rate equals the nominal interest rate
minus the expected inflation rate:
The distinction between real and nominal interest rate is important because the real interest
rate, which reflects the real cost of lending and borrowing, is a better indicator of the
incentives to borrow and lend (save) and is a more accurate indicator of how borrowers and
savers will be affected by what is happening in the financial markets, than the nominal interest
rate.
The South African Reserve bank constructs the real interest rate measure by adjusting the
nominal rate by the Reuters forward-looking or one-year-ahead targeted inflation forecast
(quarterly forecast data interpolated to obtain monthly data). From the beginning of the
monetary policy tightening cycle in June 2006, the repurchase rate has been raised by a
cumulative 500 basis points. Accordingly, the real repurchase rate initially declined before
increasing sharply from the second half of 2007 and reached a high of 6,64 per cent in
November 2008 as analysts expected future inflation to moderate in the wake of the
progressive monetary policy tightening. Alongside the improvement in inflation expectation
and relaxation of monetary policy stance from December 2008, the real interest rates trended
downwards and reached a low of 0,73 per cent in August 2010.
Simultaneously, the real interest rate on 12-month fixed deposits at banks also declined and
reached a low of 1,52 in June 2010. As a saver one may be less eager to lend or make a
deposit in such a case, because in terms of real goods and services (inflation of 5,4 per cent)
one will actually be earning a lower rate of interest.