Titulo: Address by Dr Monde Mnyande, Advisor to the Governor and Chief Economist, South African Reserve Bank, to the Financial Planning Institute of SA, at the Annual FPI Convention, Emperors Palace Convention Centre, 26 May 2010
Data: 2010-05-26
Palestrante (estimado): Monde Mnyande
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2010/73
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2010/73/beyond-the-recession-and-global-financial-crisis.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

BEYOND THE RECESSION AND GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS – A
CASE FOR THE EXPANDED SARB MANDATE
Address by Dr Monde Mnyande, Advisor to the Governor and Chief
Economist, South African Reserve Bank, to the Financial Planning
Institute of SA, at the Annual FPI Convention, Emperors Palace
Convention Centre, 26 May 2010
Master of ceremony and participants in this convention
I would like to thank the organisers for this opportunity and for inviting
me.
It is a great privilege and honour for me to share some of my views and
those of my colleagues at the South African Reserve Bank (the SARB)
on the evolving ideas about the role and responsibilities of the Bank with
regard to financial stability, congruent to the more traditional emphasis
on price stability. These views will be followed by a brief overview of
risks to the outlook, which will also serve as a conclusion.
2
1. Introduction
Critical financial datasets convincingly confirm that, although South
Africa did not suffer the full might of the recent global financial crisis as
some economically advanced countries have, South Africa’s banking
industry and the broader financial sector escaped the most recent
financial crisis relatively unscathed – we are nevertheless licking our
wounds in the real sector as evidenced by the extensive job shedding in
our economy.
Being a relatively small and open economy in which the most recent
buoyant economic growth levels were consumption driven, the slump in
global and domestic demand, combined with high debt levels, have
squeezed South African households.
Debt levels remain too high for us to be able to proudly confirm that we
are now out of the woods. Credit extension is low at present. Business
demand for credit is weak since sales and confidence are down.
Furthermore, the business sector has been challenged by the still-tight
access to credit though recently the credit criteria applied by the banking
sector have eased somewhat.
As long-term financial planners, nobody knows better than you the
importance of financial stability in business planning assumptions. Most
financial planning models, such as those of modern macroeconomic
models based on the general equilibrium view used by macro-
economists, assume some validity of extrapolating past trends into the
3
future in order to forecast future financial needs and find ways to achieve
them.
They do not, as a rule, factor into their forecasting models the kind of
turmoil that the global financial system has experienced during the past
three years. A financial crisis presents a scenario that one can hardly
plan for, and which can frustrate all efforts that had been put into sound
financial planning.
There is at least one thing in the world that model-building agents,
academics, macro-economists, financial analysts and the chorus of
policy-makers agree on: It is that a repetition of the type of crisis that
started in 2007 must be avoided at all costs. Many lessons have been
learnt, and there is much to digest in terms of proposed new regulation
and policy instruments aimed at maintaining both price and financial
stability.
At the outset, I should state that the debate about these issues in South
Africa and more specifically, at the SARB is, to a large extent, still in an
evolutionary stage. This is partly because the South African financial
system for historical, circumstantial and fundamental reasons has not
been directly impacted by the global financial crisis.1
1 The banking sector is highly concentrated, but with modest leverage ratios, relatively limited securitisation
activities, low foreign currency exposure and low foreign funding reliance.
4
We do acknowledge that there was also a bit of good fortune involved in
our escape of the worst direct effects of the financial crisis and,
therefore, we cannot afford to be complacent. We remain in unchartered
territory: On the global front, the sovereign debt challenges panning out
in the euro area have put us on the alert. The continued appetite among
foreign investors towards the emerging markets – interspersed with
occasional jitters – leaves us with a volatile exchange rate and capital
flow patterns that are not necessarily sustainable, even though they help
to finance our current-account deficit.
The recent financial crisis calls for all policy-makers and market
operators to make a joint effort that ensures the relatively speedy
recovery in the financial markets of affected economies. This has been
done to prevent further spiralling of systemic risk that would have
negatively impacted the welfare of individuals, corporates and that of
countries.
Allow me therefore to briefly give a schematic account or an overview of
the watershed declaration made by the Group of Twenty (G-20)
countries to strengthen the regulation of the financial markets, marking
the commencement of a co-ordinated global effort. I do so fully
cognisant that you are all aware as financial planners that assumptions
underpinning income projection and risk models depend partly on the
stability and predictability of global and domestic markets; hence I will
outline the progress made towards the incorporation of financial stability
in the SARB’s mandate.
5
The section that follows focuses on a framework within which various
policy instruments are co-ordinated to prevent systemic risk before it
leads to a financial crisis. Before finally closing by considering the risks
to the outlook, my address briefly confirms the growing importance of
this sector in South Africa and the manner in which it has been adapting
to international developments.
2. Declaration of the G-20 on strengthening of financial
regulations and institutions
The crucial lesson that the world leaders and authorities quickly came to
grips with during the recent financial crisis was the importance of policy
co-ordination by various authorities. The deliberations on policy issues
by the G-20 during September 2009 placed sufficient emphasis on the
tightening of the regulatory standards and strengthening the
effectiveness of financial institutions and supervision that will prevent the
build-up of excessive risk in a future crisis. These important
considerations were delegated to the Financial Stability Board whose
mandate includes, amongst others, the following:
 Monitoring and advising on market developments and their
implications for regulatory policy;
 Advising and monitoring best practice in meeting regulatory
standards;
 Setting guidelines for support and establishing supervisory
colleges;
6
 Imposing stringent capital requirements for risk-trading activities,
off-balance-sheet items and securitised products;
 Managing contingency planning for cross-border crisis
management, particularly with respect to systematically important
firms; and
 Collaborating with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to
conduct Early Warning Exercises.
The latest Global Financial Stability Report published in April 2010 by
the IMF confirmed that the risks to global financial stability have eased
as the economic recovery continues to gain momentum. Nonetheless,
households and corporates continue to spend cautiously with more
focus being on reducing their debt levels and recapitalising their balance
sheets.
The report, however, warned that the resurfacing of sovereign risk in
some developed countries, in particular Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal
and Spain or the GIIPS countries, could reverse some of the gains
already made in stabilising and restoring the health of the financial
system.
The deterioration of fiscal balances in these countries raises concern
over the sustainability of their governments’ balance sheets, which could
eventually lead to short-term strains in capital markets as creditors
require a high premium to compensate for the higher risk. Authorities in
these countries together with the IMF have put some measures in place
to shield the financial sector from yet another collapse.
7
We recognise our good fortune of having escaped the direct effects of
the financial crisis. Like elsewhere and typical of a cyclical downturn, the
global slowdown had some negative effects on the South African
economy in general and on asset prices in particular. This created a
negative feedback loop to the financial system in the form of lower
profitability of financial firms, rising credit impairments and subdued
lending activity, all of which, in turn, weighed adversely on real economic
activity.
It would therefore be unwise, in the light of developments both locally
and globally during the past three years, to rest on our laurels and not
move along with endeavours to strengthen the global financial system
and our domestic environment and financial stability framework.
3. The SARB’s mandate and financial stability
The heightened prominence of financial stability and its role in ensuring
the preservation of the wealth of households’ assets in the G-20 agenda
encouraged central banks to review the role of financial stability in their
respective economies and to consider its incorporation in their core
mandate of maintaining price stability.
The SARB has always recognised its role in promoting and partly
contributing to financial stability in the country. It has had a dedicated
Financial Stability Department since 2001 that serves to enhance the
surveillance capacity of the macroprudential or systemic integrity of the
8
domestic financial system and prevailing international trends; to identify
systemic risks in both the domestic and international environments; to
assess the robustness of the regulatory environment; and to review and
test contingency plans to handle crises in the financial sector going
forward.
As with other similar functionaries around the world, macroprudential
analysis is a developing science for which robustness is growing in leaps
and bounds, and as a member of the Bank for International Settlements,
the SARB remains at the cutting edge of international best practice. In
fact, other members are looking to South Africa for some best practice
models.
In his February 2010 open letter to the Governor of the South African
Reserve Bank, Ms Gill Marcus, the Minister of Finance, Mr Pravin
Gordhan, re-emphasised the importance of a stable and
well-regulated financial sector, as well as the need for the SARB to
establish an in-depth understanding of the banking sector and financial
system as a whole.
The sturdiness and imperviousness of the domestic banking sector to
the crisis are testimony to the proactive stance of South African
authorities’ oversight approach. A great number of us consider it crucial
to strengthen the microprudential strides achieved so far by ensuring
that they dovetail and are compatible with the macroprudential sphere of
the financial system.
9
The other crucial and challenging interface for policy oversight is
between financial and price stability. The SARB continues to explore this
dimension by considering macro- and microprudential trends in its
Monetary Policy Committee meetings.
4. Macroprudential approach and its features
In an effort to cushion our economy from the impact of the recent and
future financial crises, the SARB has intensified its pursuit of a
conscious macroprudential framework. The financial crisis prompted the
authorities to adopt countercyclical policies that will foster discipline
during an upward (and indeed downward) phase(s) of the business
cycles. These policies should help to smooth the effects of economic
cycles, minimise unintended consequences and direct the reaction of
commercial banks and those of other financial institutions towards
rational decision-making, rather than fuelling and reinforcing a particular
cyclical phase.
Mindful of the importance of asset prices, the financial stability function
of the SARB will, in line with international guidelines, attempt to identify
and monitor excessive domestic credit extension that could result in self-
feeding asset-price bubbles.
Last but not least, in cognisance of the scope of financial stability that
extends beyond its immediate function, the SARB intends to focus
continuously on the macroprudential approach and to contribute towards
10
a broader range of administrative and policy instruments to deal with
specific imbalances.
5. Developments in the domestic financial intermediaries and the
role of financial planning
The safeguard measures being put in place are merely an
acknowledgment of the pivotal role the financial service sector plays in
contributing towards the growth of our economy. Non-bank financial
intermediaries act as a conduit for entities with savings seeking
investment opportunities in the economy. Their sources of funds inter
alia include insurance policy premiums, pension contributions, unit trust
sales and loans. The SARB is in a privileged position to be able to
monitor trends in this sector, both locally and internationally. The assets
of non-bank financial intermediaries increased from an estimated R2,3
trillion during the first quarter of 2005 to over R4,0 trillion in the last
quarter of 2009. The industry recently recorded quarterly net financial
inflows to the tune of
R89 billion, from about R58 billion in 2005. Given these large sums of
funds available for investment, the country requires the majority of South
Africans to understand fully and appreciate the importance of saving and
the process of investing. It is of utmost importance to have qualified and
skilled financial planners to assist individuals and companies
appropriately in making their saving and investment choices that will
yield good returns.
11
As you know, financial planning assists in increasing cash flows while
monitoring the expenditure patterns and creating a strong base of capital
which would, in the case of corporates and the country as a whole, be
reflected in the strengthening of their respective balance sheets. In
addition, the Financial Planning Institute can play a significant role in
contributing to the establishment of regulation standards in the financial
services industry by providing well thought-out, fact-based, constructive
and consolidated submissions to authorities.
One of the key responsibilities of the SARB is to anchor inflation
expectations and maintain a long-term low inflation environment that will
preserve the wealth of domestic investors using a flexible interest rate
regime. In pursuit of its inflation-targeting mandate, the SARB is mindful
of the important role of real positive interest rates in bolstering the
domestic savings culture. Key to this approach is to reflect market
conditions that ensure appropriate returns on investments and savings.
I would like to strongly urge you to play a role in the concerted effort to
boost the culture of saving and the drive to revitalise and grow the
domestic household, corporate and government asset base. On an
aggregate level, a country with a high savings ratio can better finance its
investment projects without necessarily borrowing externally and
creating a negative imbalance on its current account. South Africa’s
savings rate deteriorated from an average of about 17 per cent of gross
domestic product in the 1990s to an average of about 14 per cent in
2007.
12
Despite a decline in both the savings rates of the corporate and
household sectors over this period, corporate saving remained the
mainstay of the overall savings. Somewhat ironically, the savings rate of
households and the corporate sector improved during 2009 amid
recessionary conditions. During 2009 the savings rate of households
improved marginally to 1½ per cent of gross domestic product.
This improvement could probably have been spurred by the desire to
neutralise the declining household wealth effects in their asset portfolio
which had resulted from slow or negative growth rates in the value of
fixed property and a decrease in the value of other asset classes.
In addition, the households spent less in fear of the economic
uncertainties at the time. The improved savings rate of the corporate
sector was clearly visible when the sector decided to declare fewer
dividends and recapitalise its balance sheets instead.
The loss of wealth incurred in the value of assets of households
highlights the significance of a financial planner’s diversification or asset
allocation strategy. The choice of asset allocation has a huge bearing on
the level of the exposure and the overall financial stability of the country.
In this regard, the SARB will continue to be transparent in its conduct of
monetary policy and ensure that the market information is disseminated
to all market participants at the same time. An appeal and advice from
monetary authorities would be for financial planners to discourage
households from funding or acquiring financial assets by incurring
13
liabilities, as these will exaggerate the value of underlying assets and
could increase the possibility of systemic risk. Clearly, we all have a role
to play.
6. Risks to the outlook
As expected, the proposed amendments and approach to policy
considerations cannot be implemented without some element of risk.
The most apparent uncertainty is the remaining risk facing the banking
sector, especially in some parts of Europe. The developments in the
GIIPS countries should caution financial institutions to continue to build
their capital base, to strengthen their balance sheets and prepare to
meet future higher capital requirements if so required. The issues of
transparency in terms of the balance-sheet positions and the exorbitant
compensation of executives remain a risk factor in financial systems.
The other risk dimension stems from the possibility of reversal of capital
flows to emerging-market economies. The asset prices of most
investment classes in which financial planners invest the funds are
driven by the sentiments of investors. Currently, investors are taking
advantage of interest rates in most emerging and commodity producing
economies, as well as the growth prospects of these economies as
projected in the recent World Economic Outlook published by the IMF in
April 2010. The potential risk in this regard is the upturn in the interest
rate cycle of the advanced economies and the reduction in the margins
thereof.
14
Although conditions in global financial stability have eased somewhat,
the recent weeks have been associated with the elevation of systemic
risk from financial sector risk to sovereign risk. The remarkable fact at
this point of the global cycle is that global capital markets are relatively
liquid compared with the first quarter of 2009, but there is a growing tier
of sovereigns and the worsening of public debt sustainability could be
transmitted back to the banking systems.
The uneven and uncertain recovery in global economic activity continues
to be supported by large-scale monetary and fiscal stimulus conducted
by various authorities. Nevertheless, forecasts of economic growth in
2010 and beyond have improved significantly over the past year. In
some countries, increasing emphasis is being placed on appropriate exit
strategies from the extraordinary and unprecedented crisis-related
intervention policies.
Although part of the risk to the outlook is more embedded in developed
economies, such risk is certainly a threat to the domestically owned
assets invested abroad and that are priced in US dollar and other foreign
currencies. Thus, financial planners need to be vigilant of the
developments in international markets in order to act appropriately at all
times.
Relying on credit rating agencies to assess various assets and asset
classes is very useful but such information has limitations, and is often
more retrospective in nature. For this reason, financial planners are
encouraged to subscribe to and invest in information-gathering
15
packages that are pre-emptive to be able to manage the wealth of
economic agents in the country efficiently.
In conclusion and more critical for all of us as financial and economic
agents is that we must be willing to learn and understand clearly the
lessons from the recent global financial crisis, and the experiences
and/or outcomes of our past recession which should strengthen our co-
ordination of policies promptly and coherently if we are to mitigate any
future economic, financial, or currency crisis.
I thank you.