Titulo: Address by Dr Monde Mnyande, Advisor to the Governor and Chief Economist, South African Reserve Bank (SARB), at the Inkululeko Media & Marketing Power Breakfast, Avianto Hotel, Muldersdrift, 09 April 2010
Data: 2010-04-09
Palestrante (estimado): Monde Mnyande
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2010/83
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2010/83/dr-mnyande-breakfast-talk.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

RELEVANCE OF THE SA RESERVE BANK TO THE DEVELOPMENT
AGENDA
Address by Dr Monde Mnyande, Advisor to the Governor and Chief
Economist, South African Reserve Bank (SARB), at the Inkululeko
Media & Marketing Power Breakfast, Avianto Hotel, Muldersdrift,
09 April 2010
Briefing note
Stable prices, that is, low inflation, stable currency value and stable
financial systems are bedrock ingredients for the economic wellbeing of
any society. These ingredients form the core of what the South African
Reserve Bank (SARB or Bank) or any other central bank for that matter
does. Explained differently, the realisation of these ingredients is the
most important way in which the Bank can contribute to the
developmental agenda of South Africa.
Relevance of the SA Reserve Bank to the Development Agenda
As the global economy emerges from the dusk of the financial crisis, it is
widely recognised that the world finds itself in unchartered territory.
Ironically, as luck will have it, it is a momentous opportunity to relook at
how things can be done in a better way. Although South Africa, similar to
other emerging economies, was not as adversely affected by the global
recession as the advanced economies, it continues to be faced with
challenges of high unyielding unemployment, poverty and inequality, and
1
an inappropriate skills structure. Notwithstanding the laudable progress
that has been made in reversing these trends over the recent past, much
more needs to be done differently and at a faster pace so as to gain
higher, sustainable levels of national output and economic participation.
May I thank you for this opportunity for the South African Reserve Bank
to participate in this forum that can be viewed as a microcosm of the
current national debate to find an appropriate micro and macroeconomic
policy mix to forge the ‘new developmental growth path’. To my
understanding, the vision of South Africa’s development agenda is to
have a more inclusive economy that will unleash
labour-absorbing industries, raise targeted public and private
investments and savings, and enhance local and global
competitiveness.
It is envisaged that this new growth trajectory will be supported by a
refocused education and training regime; a low inflation environment; a
competitive, stable exchange rate; and improved regulatory oversight.
Through these elements of the development agenda, monetary policy
creates an enabling environment and plays a supportive role to underpin
the long-term growth path.
Back in 1989 Professor A P Thirlwall argued that: “The development of a
national banking system, comprising a central bank, a commercial
banking system and special development banks, is one of the first
priorities of development planning”. The Bank has always recognised
2
that it is a national asset, which should execute its mandate with
integrity, accountability and utmost transparency. Governor Gill Marcus
has embarked on an enhanced and systematic outreach programme
that further crystallises the Bank’s operational ethos. This initiative is line
with the long-term vision of the Governor regarding the need for an
ongoing engagement with analysts, the labour movement, political
parties, community organisations, and business and international
investors to build social consensus and understanding on why and how
the Bank carries out its monetary policy mandate. In turn, the Bank also
gains in that it better understands and internalises the challenges,
concerns and aspirations of its stakeholders. As part of this outreach
programme, the Bank seeks to engage and position itself to play its
pivotal role in South Africa’s new development agenda.
The Bank's mandate is explicitly set out in the Constitution of our
Republic as “protecting the value of the currency in the interest of
balanced economic growth”. The main contribution therefore that the
Bank can make to the development agenda of South Africa is primarily
through the fulfilment of this mandate. The Bank fulfils this mandate by
ensuring 1) price stability and 2) financial stability. To ensure price and
financial stability, the Bank uses monetary policy and provides a variety
of other essential financial services to the economy.
The other crucial functions of the Bank that are seen as enabling factors
for the development agenda include the prudent supervision of banks,
as well as management and maintenance of the national payments
system. These, among others, are important in ensuring the effective
flow and settlement of cross-border capital between South Africa and the
3
rest of the world. Another function that was explicitly emphasised by the
Minister of Finance, Mr Pravin Gordhan, in a letter to the Governor
clarifying the expanded mandate of the Bank, is that of financial stability,
which entails detecting and reducing threats to the financial system as a
whole. South Africa, as a small open economy, has grown by
successfully integrating into the global economy and gaining access to
international capital markets over time. In cognisance of the strategic
contribution of these critical central banking functions, the Bank will
continue to manage prudently, effectively and efficiently its component
of macroeconomic plane.
Inflation targeting and price stability
Inflation targeting should be understood as a broad framework for policy,
which allows the central bank “constrained discretion”, rather than as an
ironclad policy rule in which inflation is the only variable to be considered
when deciding the setting of monetary policy decision. Inflation targeting
in South Africa has been very flexible and has resulted in increased
coherence and transparency of the monetary policy strategy. It
increased accountability and improved the ability of the Bank to anchor
inflation expectations, as published in the Bureau of Economic Research
(BER) surveys.
Although the framework did come across some serious challenges
during the global financial crisis, overall, empirical research suggests
that inflation targeting has worked well for emerging economies that
implemented it, including South Africa.
4
South Africa has done better under the inflation-targeting framework
than during other previous monetary policy frameworks. The success of
the policy is largely attributable to the flexible way in which it was
implemented. Inflation targeting has enabled the Bank to maintain
reasonable price stability in a way that did not generate undue negative
impact on economic growth. There has been gratuitous criticism to the
effect that monetary policy in South Africa was responsible for the latest
recessionary phase of the business cycle. That is untrue – a sharp drop
in global demand was the key driver to the severe economic contraction
of the recent past. Evidence will show that through macroeconomic
discipline, of which monetary policy is a part, South Africa, by and large,
was able to weather the storm of the international financial crisis.
Price stability means low inflation, as defined by the Government's
inflation target of 3-6 per cent. Monetary policy is mainly directed at
achieving this objective and providing a framework for non-inflationary
economic growth – balanced and sustainable economic growth.
Empirical evidence exists to the effect that very high inflation is
associated with poor growth performance. High inflation:
a) Impacts negatively on poor households, who cannot effectively
index wages and who have to endure reduced purchasing power
in the face of rising prices for food, energy and basic services.
b) Discriminates against fixed-salaried workers, pensioners and low-
income earners who cannot protect themselves from the impact of
inflation.
c) Distorts income distribution.
d) Distorts the allocation of resources.
e) Discourages saving, an important source of investment funds.
f) Leads to high interest rates and this discourages investment.
5
It is important to note that although low inflation is a necessary condition,
it is by no means a sufficient condition for economic and social
transformation in South Africa. South Africa requires unfathomable
structural changes in the opportunities for ordinary people through such
things as improved education, healthcare, housing and general
improvement of both services and the efficiency with which they are
supplied.
Monetary policy and economic growth
It needs to be pointed out clearly, that economic growth is a function of
many factors. Monetary policy is just one element in a set of economic
policies, such as fiscal policy, industrial development policy, agricultural
policy, mining policy, education policy and an array of many other
microeconomic policies. These policies should complement each other,
and not be viewed as substitutes.
The role of monetary policy in economic growth is still a contested
terrain. In my honest opinion, I subscribe to the view that it will remain in
this state as long as the contest on “What explains income and its
distribution in society,” between Marxian and Neoclassical theory
remains. There is some consensus, however, that monetary policy does
and can affect growth, but mostly in the short run. Nonetheless, the
maintenance of price stability is one of the most important contributions
that monetary policy can make to achieving the balanced and
sustainable economic growth needed for high levels of employment.
During his speech in February 2010 in Parliament, the Minister for
Economic Development, Mr Ibrahim Patel, highlighted a shift towards a
growth strategy that will enhance labour-absorbing capacity in the
6
economy. This view was also expressed in the “Industrial Policy Action
Plan (IPAP)” document prepared by the Department of Trade and
Industry (DTI). While various policies are being set and aligned to reach
this goal, the Bank will continue to endeavour to maintain a stable and
low inflation environment that will ensure that the increased labour
force’s disposable income will not be eroded by the effects of high
inflation.
A low inflation rate bodes well for the long-term investment plans of the
sectors identified in the IPAP document. The IPAP document further
notes the key structural challenges that have masked the relatively high
growth rates achieved by the South African economy during 2004-2007.
These include, firstly, the structural imbalances in the country’s
current-account balance with the rest of the world.
May I point out at this stage that it is normal for a country in the strong
upward or recovery phase of the business cycle to experience a large
current-account deficit that is related to capital investment that will
support future domestic production. The Bank takes it upon itself to
create a non-inflationary economic environment that will attract
investment into our country, needed to finance current-account deficits.
The second issue raised by the industrial policy action plan revolves
around the performance of the manufacturing sector. The function of the
monetary authorities is to control the monetary variable (nominal
exchange rate), but it is the real variable (real exchange rate) that
ultimately matters for the allocation of resources. This real variable is
largely influenced by government policies, spending patterns (savings
7
and investment), taxes, tariffs and exchange control developments, but
also changes in sentiment. .
Thirdly, the high cost of capital relative to our trading-partner countries is
regarded as a deterrent to investment in the country. Going forward, the
challenge for our economy would be to attain a balanced policy mix that
would encourage domestic savings, thereby promoting internal funding
for future investment. Anchoring inflation at a low level could also assist
in bringing the nominal cost of capital down to levels that will favour
investment in productive projects.
Stability of the exchange rate
The volatility and competitiveness of the exchange rate of the rand, as
well as the general view that the domestic exchange rate is over-valued
deserve special response. It is worth noting that, recently, developments
in the exchange rates depend on various factors, such as the inflow and
outflow of capital into the country, relative interest rates, relative growth
and commodity prices. The recent adjustments to the repo rate by the
Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee have shown that the fluctuations in
the nominal exchange rate of the rand are beyond the policy decision on
the repo rate by the Bank’s monetary authorities.
Adjusting the repo rate can result (and has at times resulted) in some
unexpected outcomes. The late 2008 depreciation of the domestic
currency was more in response to the global financial crisis, while the
subsequent recovery, from around April of 2008 was driven more by
investors responding to rising commodity prices, the improved external
8
trade position of the country, the improved inflation outlook and later on,
acceleration in real economic growth.
Regarding the appreciated level of the exchange value of the rand, I
have already mentioned that frequently countries with large current-
account deficits experience an appreciation in their domestic currencies.
The appreciation of the domestic currency may reflect strong capital
flows into the domestic economy, encouraged by high yields, gains in
share prices and strong macroeconomic fundamentals that support real
economic growth.
Taking into consideration the challenge posed by the strong currency to
the domestic sectors, the Bank will continue to support the measured
steps proposed by the National Treasury, in an effort to mitigate the high
volatility in the exchange rate.
The Bank has in the past monitored , and will continue to monitor
developments in the exchange rate of the rand, and will intervene in the
foreign exchange market when necessary. The extent of intervention,
however, must be limited given the cost implications of this exercise. In
addition, the level of reserves the Bank has accumulated thus far (some
$40 billion) is not at all high relative to daily trade volumes in the rand
foreign exchange market, which often exceeds $10 billion on a given
day.
Most importantly though is that the exchange rate must be flexible
enough to prevent persistent misalignments that would harm the
competitiveness of domestic producers and their trade performance. At
the same time, excessive volatility of exchange rate has to be avoided,
9
as this heightens the risk of long-term investment, increases domestic
inflation and encourages financial speculation.
Conclusion
The central thesis of this presentation, was to show the relevance of the
Bank in the development agenda. And more broadly, microeconomic
and macroeconomic policies should complement each other; that one
should not override the other if the development agenda has to be
realised. My view on the subject was also influenced by the profound
1
words of Hugh O’Neil, who observed that; “The advocates of Industrial
Policy argue that industrial policy is,” in the words of Robert B Reich,
“the third leg on the policy stool, as critical as monetary and fiscal
policies for economic growth and stabilisation.” I will end along the lines
of Robert B Reich, by arguing that for us, finding the right combination of
the three legs of the policy stool is key to our developmental state, and
not the issue of which stool is relevant to the developmental agenda.
Selected references
1
With whom I had a great priviledge to work with at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, at one World
Trade Center in New York between 1989 and 1991.
10
Barro, R J 1997, Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-Country
Empirical Study, The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Bullard, J and Keating J W 1995, "The Long-Run Relationship between
Inflation and Output in Postwar Economies", Journal of Monetary
Economics, Vol. 36(3), pp. 477-96.
Cozier, B and Selody J 1992, "Inflation and Macroeconomic
Performance: Some Cross- Country Evidence", Bank of Canada
Working Paper No. 92-06.
Kormendi, R C and Meguire P G 1985, "Macroeconomic Determinants of
Growth: Cross- Country Evidence", Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol.
16(2), pp. 141-163.
McCandless, G T and Weber W E 1995, "Some Monetary Facts",
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Vol. 19(3), pp.
2-11.
O’Neil Hugh, (1985), “Creating Opportunity: Reducing Poverty Through
Economic Development, The Council of State Planning Agencies”,
Washington, D.C.
Thirlwall, A P 1989, “Growth & Development with special reference to
developing economies”
11