Titulo: Address by Lesetja Kganyago, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank at an ABSIP Dinner, Sandton Sun, Johannesburg - 27 May 2011 ​ 
Data: 2011-05-27
Palestrante (estimado): Lesetja Kganyago
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2011/329
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2011/329/Address-by-Mr-Lesetja-Kganyago.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE ROLE OF MACROECONOMIC POLICY IN ACHIEVING HIGH RATES OF
ECONOMIC GROWTH IN SOUTH AFRICA
Address by Mr Lesetja Kganyago, Deputy Governor, South African Reserve
Bank at an ABSIP Dinner, Sandton Sun, Johannesburg
27 May 2011
INTRODUCTION
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for allowing me to address you tonight. As South Africans
we spend much time and energy debating the key issues of our times, in particular how to
understand and act upon the challenges of poverty, unemployment and economic growth.
The core message i want to convey to you is this... despite our many gains as a democracy
and a society, our resolution of poverty and unemployment must come as part of a long-
term process of economic growth at sustained rates well over 5% a year, an average we
achieved in the boom years of the past decade. The process will be long, primarily because
we are a society of vested interests – which makes policy formulation hard and drawn-out –
and because our human capital, public infrastructure and technological needs are also very
large. We cannot have all of these needs addressed immediately – they must be planned
and financed over realistic periods of time.
So on the one hand we need an economic reform process that consistently puts economic
growth at the forefront – understanding that growth as the Commission on Growth and
Development shows is necessary for job creation and poverty reduction. And on the other
1
hand we need to unlock the economy’s potential to generate the public funds needed for
government to provide the means of developing human capital and infrastructure.
Growth in itself is not an end – rather it is the vehicle that allows governments and societies
to realise other important socio-economic objectives. Growth is necessary for economies to
develop, to create jobs, reduce poverty, and provide sufficient resources needed to support
other fundamental goals like improved health care and education.
In thinking about how to address our challenges, it is worth recognising that it has been
rapid sustained growth in countries such as China and India that has fostered the sharp
downward trajectory in global poverty, with hundreds of millions lifted out of poverty over
the past two decades.1
The South African economy desperately needs faster, sustained growth in order to tackle its
critical socio-economic challenges of poverty and very high unemployment, particularly
among younger and less skilled individuals. There are currently over 4.3 million
unemployed – one-in-four-of those willing to work and looking for a job are unemployed. A
further 2.2 million are discouraged.
High unemployment means there is a latent supply of labour that is not acquiring the skills
or experience needed to drive the economy forward. This inhibits our economic
development and imposes a larger burden on the state to provide social assistance.
To tackle poverty and unemployment we need sustained high growth.
What is sustained, high economic growth? The Commission for Growth and Development,
led by the Nobel-prize winning economist Michael Spence, provide an intuitive guide by
using an average GDP growth rate of 7 per cent a year sustained for a period of 25 years. At
this pace, an economy almost doubles in size every 10 years.
Since 1950, there have been 13 examples of these growth champions – Botswana; Brazil;
China; Hong Kong, Indonesia; Japan; Korea; Malaysia; Malta; Oman; Singapore; Taiwan; and
Thailand.
1 Between 1990 and 2010 China grew at an average rate of 10.1 per cent a year while India expanded at an
average rate of 6.5 per cent a year. Over this period GDP per capita has risen by 522 per cent in China and by
152 per cent in India. The World Bank estimates that over the period 1990 to 2015, more than 600 million
Chinese and almost 160 million would have been lifted out of absolute poverty (less than US$1.25 a day).
2
THE RECENT GROWTH EXPERIENCE IN SOUTH AFRICA: A BRIEF SYNOPSIS OF
THE LAST 25 YEARS
The experience in South Africa does not compare to these economies, but since 1994 there
has been a marked improvement in the rate of economic growth.
After averaging a mere 1 per cent during the final decade of Apartheid, GDP growth rose to
an average of 3 per cent between 1994 and 2003 before accelerating to average almost
5 per cent between 2004 and 2008.
During this five-year period, the economy created more than 2 million jobs, helping to lower
the unemployment rate by 5 percentage points. Real per capita GDP was 30 per cent higher
in 2008 than at the time of the first democratic elections.
This progress was halted abruptly by the worst global financial and economic crisis since the
great depression. South Africa was unable to escape its impact and the economy suffered its
first recession for 17 years as output fell between the third quarter of 2008 and the second
quarter of 2009. The economy contracted by 2.7 per cent during this period and by 2010
there were one million fewer people working than at the end of 2008.
Since mid-2009, the economy has begun to improve and expand. However, the recovery has
been relatively slow. On an annualised basis, quarterly growth has averaged 3.1 per cent
over the last 18 months. The first quarter 2011 figures come out on Tuesday. High
frequency indicators, particularly for the manufacturing sector, suggest robust expansion,
and there is tentative evidence of a nascent recovery in the labour market.
Looking ahead, it is important to understand what determines economic growth and
remove the obstacles that prevent the economy from growing faster.
WHAT MATTERS FOR GROWTH?
Growth can be distilled into a triple formula of technology, capital and human capital. These
in turn depend on a number of subsidiary factors including labour productivity, health and
education, finance, market structures, regulations and other microeconomic policies,
3
economic growth in trading partners, and the macroeconomic management of the economy
through the business cycle.
Political factors are also crucial. Committed, credible and capable governments are
instrumental in providing the institutional governance and leadership that supports growth
enhancing policies. As the Commission for Growth and Development states:
“Fast, sustained growth does not happen spontaneously. It requires a long-term
commitment by a country’s political leaders, a commitment pursued with
patience, perseverance and pragmatism.”2
MACROECONOMIC POLICY AND GROWTH
Macroeconomic policies are important because they provide the framework for growth.
Fiscal and monetary policy set the pace of growth in aggregate demand and ensure that this
pace matches growth in the supply side of the economy without creating pressures that
could derail growth.
In the short-run macroeconomic policy should provide stability and certainty, helping
manage the ups and downs of the economic cycle and maintaining growth in productivity.
Over the long run, bad macroeconomic policy decisions can have a negative effect on
economic growth – as high inflation or large changes in the exchange rate, the interest rate,
or the tax burden reduce private savings, investment and economic activity.
A credible and stable macroeconomic policy – meaning minimizing large changes to key
variables – allows households and businesses to be more confident when planning for the
future. This induces more saving and investment, more rapid economic growth and greater
job creation.
Growth is more stable if fiscal and monetary policies aim to moderate price movements
over the business cycle by managing aggregate demand. In good times, when the economy
is booming, demand and confidence, production and employment, salaries and wages, and
capacity utilisation are rising, which can result in inflationary pressures. Countercyclical
macroeconomic policies – such as budget surpluses and tighter monetary policy – act to
2 Commission for Growth and Development, 2008
4
counterbalance the build up of these potentially distorting pressures and imbalances by
helping reduce aggregate demand. In doing so, these policies further ease upward pressure
on the real exchange rate.
When the economy is contracting, the opposite occurs. This was evident during the
recession as confidence levels fell and household consumption and business investment
declined sharply. Expansionary fiscal and monetary policies were implemented through
sustaining government expenditure and running a budget deficit and a cumulative 650 basis
point reduction in the repo rate that helped stimulate the economy and ensure the decline
in output was lower than it would otherwise have been.
At this stage, our economy is recovering more or less in pace with the recovery in the world
economy. The weaknesses in our recovery in some ways reflect the unusual pattern of
recovery we see in the rest of the world.
Advanced economies by and large continue to recover slowly, held down by the need to
address large housing market overhangs and sharp increases in unemployment. Their policy
settings continue to reflect the need for sustained exchange rate depreciation and support
for domestic economic activity. In due course both monetary and fiscal settings will need to
reverse to avoid the perils of high public debt levels and too much liquidity.
In Asia and some parts of Latin America, however, we see robust economic growth. Some
of this may prove unsustainable, and already the major economies have instituted policy
adjustments to tighten. Higher inflation in some of these surplus economies pushes up their
real exchange rates, and therefore, alongside the depreciation in deficit countries, needs to
be understood as a critical component of reducing macroeconomic imbalances at the global
level.
The pattern of growth in the rest of the world is reflected here in South Africa. On the one
hand we benefit from exceedingly strong terms of trade, which have risen by about 20%
since 2009. And on the other hand, we remain constrained by concerns about energy
supply, weaker infrastructure spending, and an equally weak job creation trajectory.
Our monetary and fiscal settings and terms of trade gains remain strongly supportive of
aggregate demand. Our export performance, notwithstanding the rise in the value of
5
commodities and commodity-related manufactured goods, has remained weak and has
fallen behind the rebound in trade performance in the rest of the world. Our capacity
utilisation and investment rates are too low.
Part of the answer to our economic growth challenge is, like the reforms conducted in
recent years in other BRIC economies, to get more serious about the reforms we need
internally to lower costs, increase productivity and make more rapid job creation possible.
These economies have achieved robust growth rates in recent times in part through
extensive reform programmes and despite the fact that their exchange rates have
appreciated much more than has the rand in recent years.
Private sector investment enthusiasm could be generated by ensuring that public sector
plans at all levels continue to roll out and new initiatives for future years continue to be
articulated in credible ways. Productivity raising reform and stronger public infrastructure
development would also support our more export-oriented sectors and help them to
become more competitive.
The relatively stronger exchange rate of recent times is only one part of our lack of
competitiveness, and probably only a small part of the story, especially if we reflect on the
stronger appreciations experienced in some other parts of the world over the past 10 years.
Yet it is a variable that our monetary and fiscal policies can have some effect on.
Our inflation targeting framework allows for a float of the nominal rate, allowing the
exchange rate to absorb international financial and economic shocks without requiring
drastic movements in our interest rates. This is a critically important benefit of the float and
one largely under-recognised in our current public discourse. Over the long term, this has
enabled the rand to depreciate in both nominal and real terms. Since 2006, for instance, the
time of the previous peak in exchange rates, the nominal effective exchange rate has
depreciated by 20%, while the real effective exchange rate has declined by 8.7%.
Counting from 2008, the real effective exchange rate peaked in strength in December
2010.3 A large part of our worsening competitive position in recent years has been the
sharp rise in inflation experienced between 2007 and into 2010. Headline CPI inflation rose
3 The REER depreciated again by 8% between December 2010 and February 2011.
6
by 11.3% in 2008, 7.1% in 2009 and 4.3% in 2010. These high inflation rates were driven by
excessively strong growth in domestic demand, sharp increases in food and oil prices, and as
the recession unfolded, higher electricity prices and sharp increases in unit labour costs
averaging 9% per year from 2008 to 2010.4
Under these circumstances, to maintain a stable level of competitiveness would have
required a nominal rand depreciation of roughly 23%.5 But, given the high rates of increase
in inflation between 2007 and 2010, a weaker exchange rate would have sharply increased
inflation and required a reversal of the monetary policy stance at the worst possible
moment for the South African economy.
Some of the discourse on monetary policy seems to suggest that looser policy would
increase growth both now and in the future. With stronger inflation pressures coming from
imported food and oil prices presently, looser policy would be detrimental to our growth
prospects and place an unacceptable burden of falling purchasing power on our poor.
A credible monetary framework and a counter-cyclical fiscal policy are therefore critical for
moderating movements in the real exchange rate that are caused by inflation or the rise in
our domestic price level. So from a macroeconomic perspective, we can support our
general competitiveness by enhancing the degree of counter-cyclical policy we have in
place. This is a key part of our macroeconomic policy challenge over the next year or two.
The role of monetary policy in this challenge is clear.
CONCLUSION
Allow me to conclude by noting that monetary policy cannot be used to affect the potential
growth rate of the economy over the longer term. It is not a panacea for addressing our
structural challenges, a point that is made repeatedly in the vast international literature on
economic growth. An economy can only grow faster on a sustained basis if it addresses the
binding constraints to growth. These are the microeconomic and structural impediments to
higher levels of competition, investment, innovation, skills development, and employment
that determine the economy’s long run competitiveness, productivity and capacity to grow.
4 Resulting from high wage demands & settlements and falling productivity as GDP declined.
5 This is equal to South African cumulative inflation minus the cumulative inflation rate of our trading partners
(assumed here to be zero).
7
Countries that are more productive grow faster and permanently raise the standard of living
of their people. This implies that productivity growth must feature as a fundamental
objective of our policies.
There are no short-cuts; no easy solutions; no ifs or buts; only difficult policy decisions to be
made.
Thank you
8