Titulo: Remarks by Dr Monde Mnyande, Chief Economist and Adviser to the Governor, at a presentation hosted by the Institute for Futures Research at the Protea Hotel, Midrand, 21 June 2011
Data: 2011-06-21
Palestrante (estimado): Monde Mnyande
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2011/326
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2011/326/Remarks-by-Dr-Monde-Mnyande.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

A perspective on monetary policy in South Africa
Remarks by Dr Monde Mnyande, Chief Economist and Adviser to
the Governor, at a presentation hosted by the Institute for Futures
Research at the Protea Hotel, Midrand, 21 June 2011
Introduction
This year, the South African Reserve Bank (the Bank) celebrates nine
decades of existence. Having been established in December 1920, the
country and the Bank have observed different levels of economic growth
and have, as such, witnessed much economic turbulence.
The recent turbulence in international financial markets and the
concomitant credit squeeze and impaired access to credit have once
again amplified the role of monetary policy, globally and in South Africa.
Historically the core functions of the Bank, like that of most central
banks, have essentially remained that of control over currency and
maintaining the purchasing power of the monetary unit. In other words,
the Bank’s principal objective remains that of achieving and maintaining
price stability – defined by Alan Greenspan, as “an environment in which
inflation is so low and stable over time that it does not materially enter
into the decisions of households and firms.”
The Bank has used different monetary policy frameworks over time,
such as credit ceilings and credit controls in the 1960s and 1970s,
money supply growth targets from the middle of the 1980s, money
2
supply growth guidelines by the early 1990s, an eclectic approach from
the mid-1990s, and an inflation-targeting regime since February 2000.
The philosophy, style and methods of monetary policy formulation and
implementation have undergone various changes since the Bank
commenced operations in June 1921. The purpose of this presentation
is to review monetary policy in relation to inflation, economic growth, the
business cycle and ongoing economic debates from 1999.
Review of inflation targeting monetary policy approach
The Bank is one of some 27 countries that adopted an inflation-targeting
framework after New Zealand had become the first inflation targeter in
1990. The first target set in South Africa was specified in terms of an
average for a particular calendar year, 2002 in that instance. In
November 2003 the Minister of Finance announced that the calendar-
year averaging would fall away and that the target would apply
continuously, while the “escape clause” was renamed an “explanation
clause”, to help clarify the degree of flexibility given to the Bank in the
conduct of monetary policy. Although the Bank has always accepted co-
responsibility for preserving financial stability in the country, the Minister
of Finance, during February 2010, reaffirmed the Bank’s role in
overseeing and ensuring the strong prevalence of financial stability in
the country in the interest of well-balanced long-term economic growth
and development.
South Africa follows a “constrained discretion” flexible-inflation-targeting
approach to monetary policy formulation. This implies that the Bank
takes account of short-run output effects when deciding how rapidly
inflation should return to within the official inflation target range.
The countries that have followed this approach in recent years have
achieved greater stability of long-run inflation expectations and have
3
achieved significant advantages in having clear objectives and targets in
formulating monetary policy. In addition, inflation targeting implies a
responsibility on the part of the Bank to achieve the predetermined
inflation outcome rather than a direct emphasis on stabilising the
business cycle – although monetary policy actions may contribute to the
business cycle. The Bank aims to create monetary stability that, in turn,
facilitates economic growth and much-needed development.
The inflation-targeting framework has generally been found to perform
well as it tended to reduce levels of volatility in inflation, interest rates
and output while the exchange rate pass-through moderated somewhat.
Broad trends in inflation since the introduction of inflation targeting
Since the inception of inflation targeting in South Africa, the targeted
measure of CPI inflation has mostly remained within the inflation target
range. However, there have been two periods of notable exception.
The first of these occurred during 2002 – the first year for which the
inflation target was set. CPIX inflation picked up notably throughout
2002, due to an increase in international crude oil prices, a steep
increase in domestic food prices and, in particular, imported goods
prices, following the marked depreciation in the exchange rate of the
rand in the second half of 2001.
The second period when inflation breached the upper limit of the inflation
target range was from April 2007 until the end of 2009. The sharp
depreciation in the exchange rate of the rand from May 2006 and
sustained high and rising international crude oil prices, together with
sharply rising international food prices, caused consumer price inflation
to accelerate from about the middle of that year.
More recently, international food and crude oil prices have, once again,
started to increase ominously. The effect of these increases on domestic
4
inflation has been shielded somewhat by the continued strength in the
exchange value of the rand, with headline CPI inflation picking up
gradually and amounting to a year-on-year rate of 4,2 per cent in April
2011 – still well within the inflation target range. However, inflation
expectations, as measured by the inflation expectations survey
conducted by the Bureau for Economic Research at Stellenbosch
University, point to an expected increase in targeted inflation to an
average rate of 5, 3 per cent in 2011 and 5, 7 per cent in 2012.
The Bank’s CPI forecast expects inflation to reach the upper limit of the
target range during the final quarter of 2011 and to peak at 6, 3 per cent
in the first quarter of 2012, before returning to within the target range by
the second quarter of 2012 and remaining close to the upper limit of the
range for the rest of that year. Inflation is expected to average 5, 1 per
cent in 2011 and 6, 0 per cent in 2012.
Broad trends in the business cycle and economic growth since the
introduction of inflation targeting
Owing to the complex developments in the global economy and
collaborative measures taken by policy-makers of different economic
clusters in response to the prevailing economic climate, it is almost
impossible to discuss monetary policy in isolation. In addition, monetary
policy is in many countries expected to play an increased role, especially
during this period where the fiscal policy stance, for sustainability
reasons, often reflects austerity measures. Nonetheless, the impact of
monetary policy in minimising the fluctuations in economic activity or
rather the relationship between monetary policy and the business cycle
remains a focal point of today’s deliberations.
Beryl. W Sprinkel (1986) describes a three-phased lagged approach in
which policy reactions interact with the economic cycle. The first is the
“observation lag” which is normally associated with uncertainty about
5
contemporaneous economic activity. Data on activity initially contains
mixed signals not allowing precise judgement on appropriate policy
measures required to respond to economic conditions. Secondly, the
“execution lag” where policy decisions are taken and implemented. This
lag is usually shorter for monetary policy than that of fiscal policy due to
the frequent meetings convened by the monetary policy authorities and
relative ease with which monetary policy settings can be changed.
Thirdly, the “impact lag”, which describes the lapsed time between a
change in monetary policy and its ultimate influence on the economy.
Thus, uncertainty about these time lags and the effects of monetary
policy, and the magnitude and duration of economic cycles reflect the
complexities in dealing with economic cycles.
The broad views about the effects of monetary policy on economic
cycles can be addressed by reviewing, firstly, the role of monetary policy
in stabilising output by minimising the deviations from the long-term
growth trend. The biggest challenge for monetary policy, particularly in
advanced economies, is to prove its effectiveness in stabilising output
fluctuations in an environment of low inflation and financial crisis.
Secondly, its ability to influence aggregate output and demand without
compromising its primary objective of price stability. Lastly, the manner
and transparency of implementation of monetary policy, for the sake of
public information and influencing inflation expectations.
Preliminary indications are that the conduct of monetary policy under
these considerations has generally led to, in addition to reduced output
volatility, recession episodes becoming shorter and milder. Prudent
macroeconomic policies are, of course, not solely responsible for this
outcome. The improvements in technology, globalisation, deepened
financial markets and financial liberalisation have also played a
significant role in fostering higher productivity.
6
The aforementioned influences of monetary policy on the business cycle
have indeed been observed in the South African economy and can be
illustrated by comparing the growth and contractionary phases
experienced during the period from 1990 to the first quarter of 2011 with
those that occurred prior to the 1990s.
Prior to 1990, especially in the 1970s and 1980s, growth in real gross
domestic product has been unduly volatile, leading to visible variations
in the economic cycles that discouraged investment in South Africa.
Over that period foreign direct investment into South Africa was virtually
insignificant while portfolio flows almost dried up due to political
sanctions and limited access to international capital markets. The lack of
stable long-run economic growth partly reflected the absence of an
appropriate domestic monetary policy strategy to deal with the economy.
As a result of short-lived monetary policy strategies prior to 1990, the
real economic growth cycles tended to be short and somewhat volatile.
However, as the monetary authority gradually gained a firmer footing on
monetary policy strategies, especially towards the mid-1990s, the
expansionary phases of the domestic economic cycles tended to have
an extended duration while the contractionary phase, although sharp
and painful at times, was relatively short.
Since the adoption of inflation targeting, the domestic economy has
experienced one downward phase, which lasted for only 21 months from
December 2007 to August 2009. During the two years prior to this
downward phase the monetary policy stance was more restrictive in
response to higher domestic prices. However, as the downward cycle
resumed, the monetary authority eased the policy rate to minimise the
impact of the global financial crisis and the subsequent reduced
demand.
7
Turning to the upward phases of domestic economic cycles, the country
has undergone three expansionary phases since 1990. These upswings
were typically extended for a longer period and at a gradual pace. Both
the first and second upward phases were accompanied by an average
real economic growth rate of around 3, 5 and 4, 4 per cent respectively
and a reduction in official policy rates. The first prolonged upswing that
started in 1993 lasted for 36 months as the monetary policy authority
developed better policy strategies. As monetary policy implementation
improved with the adoption of inflation targeting in 2000, the second
expansionary phase lasted even longer, 99 months from 1999 to 2007.
In this phase, quarterly GDP growth rates reached 7, 4 per cent in the
second quarter of 2005 and growth rates of above 6 per cent were
recorded in several quarters between 2004 and 2007; evidence that the
7 per cent growth rates in the current economic growth debate are not
with out precedent, although the challenge is to achieve them on sustain
basis. The 2007/08 global financial crisis, which brought this cycle to an
end, instinctively reminded us that despite our efforts and needs for a
stable economic growth environment, we live in a world of booms and
busts of economic activity.
During most of this phase, domestic monetary policy has been largely
accommodative amid stable and gradually declining inflation. The
sustained long-run growth alongside accommodative monetary policy
was further encouraged by other complementary policies, including
expansionary fiscal policy and enhancement of trade policies.
The current or third upswing is by now nearly 22 months long and its
duration is largely dependent on, among other factors, sustainability of
demand, capacity utilisation and employment levels. This phase is
characterised by some structural supply-side constraints and, despite an
extraordinary rise in international commodity prices, the volume of
mining production has remained disappointingly unresponsive.
8
Infrastructural and capacity constraints coupled with the persistently high
levels of unemployment continue to limit the growth potential of our
economy in this cycle. These are critical issues that we should address
jointly as households, business, labour, policy-makers and government.
As mentioned earlier, this era seems to be challenging for most
monetary authorities, as monetary policy, amid the fiscal austerity
measures taken by most governments, is expected to play a more
visible role in reviving the economic activity in an environment of already
low interest rates and mixed signals from short-term economic data. This
scenario has led to some authorities leaving the economic cycle to be
influenced by what we referred to earlier as the “observation lag”.
In exercising that option, the interest rates of most advance economies
were left unchanged at low levels. In some emerging-market economies,
the threat of a narrowing output gap has forced authorities to opt for the
“execution lag” where policy rates were raised to avoid overheating of
their domestic economies. In South Africa, although inflationary
pressures are starting to set in, the Bank has kept the repo rate
unchanged at its lowest level in 30 years. This stance has thus far been
supportive to the real economic growth rate which has been increasing
firmly since the rebound from the recession in early 2009.
Monetary policy is not conducted in isolation from ongoing economic
debates in the country. The Bank, through its Outreach Programme,
continuously engages stakeholders in the economy on a wide range of
economic issues that are pertinent to monetary policy. Some of the
issues covered include, but are not limited to, the level and volatility of
the rand, the country’s reserves, growth and unemployment issues,
national savings, administered prices, financial sector architecture,
primary sector production capacity and architecture (e.g.,
nationalisation), as well as issues of resources and capacity (land,
9
water, electricity, etc). These are important matters that the Bank takes
into account in its policy-making and implementation processes.
Conclusion
In conclusion, allow me to summarise a number of points relevant to the
present and likely future course of monetary policy:
- It is mostly agreed that stable monetary policy and the subsequent
price stability, achieved through inflation targeting, are
prerequisites for sustained long-run economic growth with less
cyclical volatility as envisaged in the government’s New Growth
Path.
- The world space has changed tremendously over the past two
decades; whereas double-digit rates of inflation were common in
the 1970s and 1980s, discipline has been restored as far as
inflation is concerned.
- South Africa is fortunate to be part of that more disciplined
process, since there are no lasting benefits in embracing inflation,
but many costs and frictions.
- Our world of lower inflation is also our world of lower nominal
interest rates.
- Monetary policy now has clear, explicit objectives – inflation
targeting has made this government policy transparent – and
policy-makers are always mindful and conscious of the broader
challenges of the economy and of financial stability considerations.
- The Bank participates vigorously in the ongoing economic debates
to ensure its relevance and effectiveness in the macroeconomic
policy space. Low inflation is in the interest of sustainable quality
growth and development. What the Bank does – combating
inflation – is in fact necessary in order to have a strong platform
10
from which growth and job creation by households and firms can
take off materially and gain momentum.
Thank you