Titulo: Introductory remarks by Johan van den Heever,  Deputy Chief Economist of the South African Reserve Bank at the release of the June 2012 Quarterly Bulletin
Data: 2012-06-21
Palestrante (estimado): Johan
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2012/349
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2012/349/Quarterly-Bulletin-Summary-21-June-2012.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Introductory remarks
by Johan van den Heever,
Deputy Chief Economist of the South African Reserve Bank
at the release of the June 2012 Quarterly Bulletin
on 21 June 2012
Welcome to the launch of the June 2012 Quarterly Bulletin of the South
African Reserve Bank, in which the focus is on economic developments in the first
quarter of 2012. Allow me to first point out a handful of notable trends and highlights,
which will be illustrated in the graphs to be presented shortly.
In a nutshell one can say that the South African economic recovery continues,
despite both international and domestic headwinds. Growth decelerated slightly in
the first quarter of 2012, and continues to be unevenly dispersed at the sectoral level.
Aggregate domestic expenditure again rose more briskly than domestic production
over the period.
As far as the international environment is concerned, economic outcomes in
the euro area in particular have been disappointing in the first five months of the
year. This has contributed to a weakening of most commodity prices and a moderate
deterioration in South Africa’s terms of trade. Strike activity in the first quarter of 2012
also detracted from mining production and exports, resulting in subdued export
volumes while import volumes continued to rise. Under these circumstances the
trade deficit with the rest of the world widened in the first quarter of the year.
Together with a larger shortfall on the services, income and current transfer account
with the rest of the world, this resulted in a further widening of the current-account
deficit.
However, one should remember that this current-account deficit was again
readily financed from abroad, and more fundamentally that the floating exchange rate
2
dispensation in South Africa provides a mechanism which moderates the magnitude
of imbalances arising on the balance of payments. The exchange value of the rand in
fact declined in the second quarter of 2012. It may also be noted that company
dividend declarations - and therefore dividends accruing to non-residents - rose
significantly in the quarter under review, partly to escape a higher effective rate of
taxation later on. This may therefore well be temporary in nature.
A most welcome trend is the further strengthening of South Africa’s foreign
travel receipts from the rest of the world. It should be pointed out that such receipts
have risen to the point where they now exceed the travel proceeds recorded at the
time of the FIFA World Cup Football Tournament in 2010. Structural changes
supporting this trend include higher spending by visitors from African countries such
as Angola. The increased travel receipts is also testimony to the efforts of the tourism
sector, alongside South Africa’s diversity, natural beauty and pleasant climate. While
this release of the Quarterly Bulletin coincides with the longest night and shortest day
in the Southern Hemisphere, even at this point the maximum temperature for the day
in sunny Pretoria will be a pleasant 19 degrees centigrade.
Allow me to mention the most recent inflation outcomes. The consumer price
inflation rate released on 20 June could not be incorporated in this Quarterly Bulletin,
which had already been printed at the time. However, the fact that in the early part of
2012 inflation has generally been lower than earlier projections is to be welcomed, as
is the reading of 5,7 per cent which was released yesterday by Statistics South
Africa. Recent trends in food inflation and in the oil price have been favourable, while
the rather tame pace of increase in bank loans and advances to the private sector
suggests the absence of credit-driven inflationary pressures.
The modest gain in formal-sector employment in the first quarter of 2012
(released on 19 June) is also to be welcomed, although South Africa clearly needs
stronger momentum on this front. The South African Reserve Bank continues to
provide a stable platform for enhanced growth and job creation through its policies.
At the same time the Bank monitors the range of initiatives, programmes and
policies set to structurally raise South Africa’s growth and employment potential, and
is heartened by the greater urgency attached to them.
These then are a few pointers. The presentation highlighting key graphs from
the publication follows immediately.
3
The Introduction to the June 2012 Quarterly Bulletin reads as follows:
Concerns about fiscal sustainability in Italy and Spain gave rise to a sharp increase in
sovereign yields in the closing months of 2011. These fears and the concomitant loss
of confidence were partly arrested by strong policy responses and a simultaneous
commitment by European Union (EU) member countries to address the fiscal deficits
and outstanding debt obligations of European economies. Furthermore, the provision
of additional funding by the European Central Bank (ECB) helped to reduce the risk of
a liquidity crisis, thereby raising market sentiment and contributing to the enhanced
economic performance of advanced as well as developing countries in the opening
months of 2012. The more optimistic outlook, however, deteriorated somewhat in May
2012 on renewed concerns and mounting speculation that Greece may leave the euro
area and fading hopes of reaching a resolution on fiscal integration. This negative
news unsettled global financial markets, causing stock markets to tumble while
simultaneously increasing volatility in foreign-exchange markets. Although the outlook
for growth in the United States (US) improved in the first quarter of 2012, activity in
China, India and emerging Asia moderated alongside weaker growth prospects for the
euro area, South Africa’s most important trading partner.
Real economic growth in the domestic economy decelerated to 2,7 per cent in the
first quarter of 2012, notwithstanding the sustained accommodative monetary policy
stance and an improvement in business confidence levels. Production volumes in the
mining sector contracted sharply in the first quarter of 2012 due to domestic supply
constraints alongside relatively weaker demand from especially Asia. Growth in the
real output in the manufacturing sector, however, accelerated in response to a more
vibrant domestic economy; export volumes remained fairly subdued over the period.
In addition to relatively weak demand from the euro area, domestic producers also
experienced a decline in international price competitiveness due to an increase in the
real effective exchange rate of the rand. Real value added by the construction sector
rose moderately, largely underpinned by civil construction activity. By contrast, the
real output of the trade sector displayed slower growth over the period. The finance
sector recorded the strongest growth among the tertiary sectors in the first quarter of
2012.
Consistent with the slower growth in domestic production, real gross domestic
expenditure also lost some momentum in the first quarter of 2012. Household
4
consumption expenditure moderated in pace with a slower rate of increase in real
disposable income, notwithstanding low interest rates and attractive prices of
imported items. Government consumption expenditure increased at a slower pace in
the first quarter of 2012, reflecting a decline in the procurement of military equipment
and a much slower pace of increase in salaries and wages following the completion
of the population census fieldwork conducted in the preceding quarter. Fixed capital
formation was supported by the enhanced affordability of imported capital goods, low
interest rates and the higher priority assigned to infrastructural development in public-
sector investment programmes. Nevertheless, the ratio of fixed investment to gross
domestic product in South Africa remained low relative to that of many other
developing countries and to investment levels needed to obtain higher growth.
Enhanced levels of capital formation, allocated to economically efficient and
sustainable projects, would go a long way towards strengthening the job-creating
capacity of the economy.
According to the Quarterly Labour Force Survey (QLFS) conducted by Statistics
South Africa (Stats SA), South Africa’s official unemployment rate rose from 25 per
cent in the first quarter of 2011 to 25,2 per cent in the first quarter of 2012. Even
though 304 000 job opportunities were created in the year to the first quarter of 2012,
the pace of increase was not sufficient to prevent the number of unemployed people
increasing by 164 000; the number of discouraged work-seekers also rose by
112 000 over the same period.
Owing to the sustained strong increases in real gross domestic expenditure, the
deficit on the trade account of the balance of payments widened significantly in the
first quarter of 2012 as import volumes continued to rise alongside declining export
volumes. The size of the trade deficit was exacerbated by a further deterioration in
South Africa’s terms of trade, as declining commodity prices adversely affected
South Africa’s export earnings. Combined with a meaningfully larger shortfall on the
services, income and current transfer account with the rest of the world, the current-
account deficit widened further to 4,9 per cent of gross domestic product in the first
quarter of 2012. This negative imbalance continued to be financed through a
combination of net foreign direct investment, portfolio and other investment-related
foreign capital inflows. In fact, the substantially larger net inward movement of capital
in the first quarter of 2012 gave rise to an improvement in the overall balance-of-
payments position. This contributed to an increase in the nominal effective exchange
rate of the rand over the period, assisting in the moderation of inflationary pressures.
5
Global consumer price inflation remained well contained in early 2012, despite
intensifying concerns regarding international oil prices resulting from geopolitical
tensions over the period. Against the background of slowing global demand, crude oil
prices, however, receded notably in May. In South Africa the acceleration in domestic
inflation was arrested during the opening months of 2012 as twelve-month headline
consumer price inflation moderated from
6,3 per cent in January 2012 to 6,0 per cent in March before picking up marginally to
6,1 per cent in April. This favourable development primarily resulted from a moderation
in food price inflation.
Growth in credit extension picked up its pace during the first quarter of 2012, buoyed
mainly by renewed appetite for credit by the corporate sector, which probably
reflected the sector’s continued fixed investment activity and inventory accumulation.
Although all credit categories contributed towards the overall increase in total loans
and advances, the general loans category remained the dominant form of new credit
extension in the opening months of 2012, while the asset-backed categories
maintained muted growth rates. General loans to the household sector – also
referred to as unsecured lending – rose briskly although at a somewhat slower pace
than before.
Short-term money-market rates continued to track the sideways movement in the
repurchase rate during the first five months of 2012, while forward rate agreements
most recently started discounting the possibility of policy easing towards the end of
the year. The South African Reserve Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) kept
the repurchase rate unchanged at its May 2012 meeting. While the inflation forecast
appears to be more favourable, the committee emphasised the renewed risks from a
possible further weakening of the exchange rate of the rand. However, the MPC
noted that countervailing pressures could come from weaker demand and lower
commodity prices, particularly those of oil. On balance, the risks to the inflation
outlook appear to be somewhat on the upside.
Despite the change of South Africa’s sovereign debt outlook to negative by the rating
agency Standard & Poor’s in March 2012, local bond yields continued to fluctuate
downwards. This trend occurred alongside the appreciation in the exchange value of
the rand up to March, the release of better-than-expected inflation data, strong
demand for domestic bonds by non-residents and the announcement of the likely
inclusion of South African government bonds in the Citigroup World Government
Bond Index (WGBI) in the near future. Citigroup confirmed such inclusion early in
6
June, indicating that it would take effect in October. Domestic share prices reached
an all-time high in early May 2012.
National government recorded a smaller deficit in fiscal 2011/12 than originally
budgeted, mainly on account of stronger revenue collections. Corporate income tax
and customs duty collections exceeded the original projections by a considerable
margin, more than offsetting weaker-than-budgeted value-added tax collections. The
deficit of 4,9 per cent of gross domestic product was predominantly financed in the
domestic bond market. Despite more than three years of significant fiscal stimulation,
government’s gross loan debt, while rising, still remained below 39 per cent of annual
gross domestic product.