Titulo: Governor's Address at the Ninety-Second Ordinary General Meeting (AGM) of shareholders held on Friday, 27 July 2012 at 10:00 
Data: 2012-07-27
Palestrante (estimado): None
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/governor's-address-to-shareholders/2012/352
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/governor%27s-address-to-shareholders/2012/352/Address-by-Governor-Gill-Marcus.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

GOVERNOR’S ADDRESS
Ninety-Second Ordinary General Meeting
(AGM) of shareholders held on
Friday, 27 July 2012 at 10:00
1
GOVERNOR’S ADDRESS
Dear Shareholders,
Members of the Board,
Deputy Governors,
Ladies and Gentlemen
It has become almost customary to begin the Governor’s Address with the words
“this past year has been extremely challenging”. This year is no different: it has
indeed been a challenging year in a highly turbulent global environment. In my
address to the Annual General Meeting last year, I reported on the precarious state
of the global economy. There was cautious optimism that the global slowdown being
experienced was a “soft patch” and that the positive growth trend that had been
observed earlier in the year would resume soon. The domestic economy was also
showing tentative signs of a sustained recovery. Unfortunately, things have not
progressed as hoped, and the global economy is possibly in a worse position now
than was the case this time last year. The global financial crisis is now in its fifth
year and there seems to be no end in sight. Indeed, Mervyn King, Governor of the
Bank of England, recently expressed the view that we are only halfway through the
global crisis. If he is correct, it means we have a protracted period of turbulence
ahead of us, and the challenges will intensify. Moreover, the further away the
recovery is, the steeper the climb out of the crisis is likely to be.
During the past year there have been significant swings in sentiment in financial
markets, particularly related to the outlook for the euro area. The sovereign debt and
banking crisis in the region continues, despite a number of official interventions. Two
rounds of significant liquidity injections from the European Central Bank helped to
avoid a liquidity crisis in the banking sector, and more recently a bail-out of the
Spanish banking sector was required. Other initiatives, including a Greek debt
restructuring, have also bought some time regarding a possible exit by Greece from
the Eurozone, an event which could unleash further destabilising contagion effects
on some of the larger Eurozone economies. Borrowing costs for both Spain and Italy
2
have risen to unsustainable levels and it is clear that the crisis has moved beyond
the periphery of Europe.
The financial markets remain unconvinced about the adequacy of the firewalls
erected to prevent the crisis from spreading as well as the political will of
governments to resolve the crisis. The changing sentiment in this regard has
resulted in a high degree of volatility in global financial markets, and this has spilled
over to emerging markets, including South Africa, impacting on capital flows,
exchange rates and commodity prices.
The global growth environment also deteriorated over this past financial year. Initially
it appeared that the recovery in the advanced economies was gaining momentum,
but during the second half of 2011 growth slowed down in the euro area with almost
half the members experiencing negative growth by first quarter of 2012. The growth
slowdown has been reinforced by continued fiscal austerity and bank deleveraging,
while unemployment - which varies considerably between different member
countries - continues to reach new Eurozone-era highs. As this negative spiral
intensifies, it is likely to become less economically and politically sustainable.
More recently weak growth has spread beyond the Eurozone. The United Kingdom
remains in recession and the outlook for the United States has also deteriorated as
growth slowed in the second quarter of this year. The so-called fiscal cliff is already
beginning to impact negatively on consumption and investment decisions in that
country. It is estimated that failure to resolve this issue could lead to a fiscal
contraction of around 4 percentage points of GDP, with negative consequences for
growth.
Some of the large systemically important emerging markets, including China, India
and Brazil, have also slowed markedly this year. Commodity prices have declined
as a result, reversing the strong upward trend seen in the second half of last year.
International oil and food prices have moderated in the first half of this year,
contributing to a more benign global inflation environment. However, there are risks
to the global inflation outlook posed by the recent drought-induced increases in grain
prices in the United States.
3
Policy responses to these developments have been constrained in many countries
by unsustainable sovereign debt positions. The lack of fiscal space to respond to the
current phase of the crisis has resulted in increased, and in some instances
unrealistic, expectations being placed on central banks. Unfortunately central banks
are limited in what they can do, and it is important that central banks, the South
African Reserve Bank included, focuses on what it can do and not what some would
like us to do.
In many cases implicit mandates, particularly with respect to financial stability, have
now been made more explicit. The extension of the Bank’s mandate to include
responsibility for financial stability should be seen in this context. During the past
year the Bank has remained focused on carrying out its various mandates: to
achieve its primary mandate of price stability in support of sustainable growth; to
contribute to a stable financial system at a macroprudential level; and to ensure the
stability of the banking system.
The domestic growth outlook has also deteriorated largely due to the global
uncertainties. These linkages are mainly through the trade channel and lower
commodity prices. The Bank’s growth forecasts have been revised down, with
growth still below potential, and downside risks to the outlook. At the time of the
previous AGM, the Bank was forecasting a growth rate of 3,9 per cent for 2012 and
4,4 per cent for 2013. The most recent forecasts now show forecasts of 2,7 per cent
and 3,8 per cent for these two years, and the MPC viewed the risks to these
forecasts to be on the downside. The deteriorating outlook has been reflected in
declining business and consumer confidence and most of the forward looking
indicators are negative. Household consumption expenditure, which had been the
main driver of growth in 2011, has moderated. But of greater concern is the anaemic
growth of 1,8 per cent in private sector gross fixed capital formation in the first
quarter of 2012. The manufacturing sector is also slowing, with the mining and
construction sectors remaining under severe stress.
Monetary policy was faced with the challenge of dealing with increased inflation
pressures in this subdued domestic economic growth environment. Headline inflation
4
moved above the 6 per cent upper end of the target range in November 2011, driven
by exogenous factors, mainly food, electricity and petrol. International oil prices were
impacted by stronger global growth and geopolitical factors, although this trend was
reversed in April and food price inflation also moderated. Initially it was anticipated
that the rate of inflation would remain outside the target range during the whole of
2012, but it now appears that inflation may have peaked at 6,3 per cent in January
2012. Year-on-year inflation measured 5,5 per cent in June and is expected to
remain within the target range on a sustained basis over the forecast period,
averaging around 5 per cent in both 2013 and 2014
Given the subdued domestic economy, the risks to the inflation outlook are mainly of
a cost-push nature. At its most recent meeting in July, the Monetary Policy
Committee (MPC), indentified food prices as being an upside risk to inflation, a result
of US grain price developments, which have already impacted on domestic maize
and wheat prices. The exchange rate, while volatile, has been relatively resilient,
particularly in the face of strong inflows to the domestic government bond market,
which year-to-date have totaled around R62.5 billion. However, we are seeing
significant daily swings in both directions. Overall the MPC assessed the risks to the
inflation outlook to be fairly evenly balanced.
Given the lack of domestic demand pressures on inflation as reflected in well-
contained core inflation measures, and the persistently negative output gap, the
monetary policy stance has remained accommodative. The repurchase rate had
been unchanged at 5,5 per cent per annum since November 2010. However at the
July meeting, the MPC felt that in the light of the relatively benign inflation
environment, and the downside risks to the growth outlook, further accommodation
would be appropriate and would not undermine the Bank’s primary objective of price
stability. Accordingly the repurchase rate was reduced to 5,0 per cent per annum.
There has been much speculation as to whether this was a beginning of a renewed
interest rate easing cycle. This interest rate reduction should, however, be seen as
part of the continued monetary policy response to the crisis that began in 2008.
Previously we had thought that we were at the bottom of the interest rate cycle,
although we had indicated that the monetary policy stance was likely to be
5
unchanged for some time. However, as the global and domestic environment failed
to recover in line with expectations, and as the outlook has deteriorated, a further
response was seen to be appropriate to ease the strains in some sectors of the
economy. Further monetary easing is not automatic and will be highly dependent on
global and domestic developments.
The Bank’s financial stability mandate has been a strategic focus during the past
year. Progress has been made in moving towards a twin peaks model of financial
regulation, which will see the consolidation and strengthening of all prudential
regulation of financial institutions within the Bank, while market conduct regulation of
the financial sector will be consolidated and strengthened within the Financial
Services Board. A steering committee comprising senior officials from the Bank, the
National Treasury and Financial Services Board has been working to give effect to
implementing the new regulatory architecture. This broadened mandate has already
resulted in a reconstitution of the Bank’s Financial Stability Committee as a policy-
making body, but will also ultimately have significant personnel and cost implications.
On the microprudential front, the banking system has remained stable, with minimal
exposure to the peripheral Eurozone economies. The Bank has continued its active
participation in the deliberations on banking regulatory reform in the Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision (Basel Committee). Amended regulations
relating to Banks were implemented in January and progress has been made with
respect to the planned phasing in of the Basel III regulatory framework at the
beginning of 2013.
The South African banks remain well capitalised, and their required capital ratios are
in excess of those required by the revised regulations. The challenges relating to the
liquidity requirements have been alleviated somewhat by the Bank clearly stating its
intention to make available a committed liquidity facility to assist banks in meeting
the liquidity coverage ratio (LCR). This facility covers up to 40 per cent of the LCR
which should enable the banks to meet their liquidity requirements while at the same
time reduce their vulnerability to possible shocks. The introduction of the Net Stable
Funding Ratio (NSFR) in 2019 is expected to be more of a challenge, but the details
of these requirements are currently subject to negotiation and are still to be finalised.
6
The Bank continued with its policy of building its stock of foreign exchange reserves.
In the 2011/12 financial year the Bank, in conjunction with the National Treasury,
purchased approximately US$4 billion of foreign exchange for this purpose. The
process of sterilising the impact of these purchases on domestic liquidity contributed
to the Bank reporting an after-tax loss of R490,5 million, compared with a loss of
R1,2 billion in the previous financial year. The losses arise due to the extremely low
rates of return available on foreign exchange deposits, while the liquidity is
withdrawn by issuing SARB debentures and conducting reverse repurchase
agreements at or around the prevailing repo rate. Some of the costs of sterilisation
were delayed by swapping a portion of the purchases into the forward market.
However, what also contributed to the losses incurred this financial year was the
significant actuarial loss incurred in meeting the post-employment medical benefit
liability as at 31 March 2012.
Going forward, the deteriorating global situation and heightened expectations of
central banks will pose continued challenges for us. The International Monetary Fund
(IMF) recently revised down its forecasts for global growth in 2012 and 2013. While
these downward revisions were relatively small, the downside risks were seen to
“loom large”, and predicated in part on appropriate policy responses in the Eurozone
to resolve the crisis. The situation looks increasingly precarious. A quick resolution to
the Eurozone crisis is unlikely, and this poses continuing risks to our own growth
prospects. At the same time the Bank needs to remain vigilant to inflation and
financial stability risks, and to respond appropriately in line with our mandate. We will
continue to implement policy in a responsible manner and will strive to remain a
beacon of stability in a turbulent environment.
7