Titulo: Address by Rashad Cassim, Head of Research, South African Reserve Bank at the Reuters Economist of the year awards.
Data: 2013-04-09
Palestrante (estimado): Rashad Cassim
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2013/371
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2013/371/Research--Monetary-Policy-in-South-Africa_Rcassim.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Research and the Making of Monetary Policy in South Africa
Rashad Cassim
Head of Research
Reuters Economist of the Year 2013
The role of analysis and research in the formulation and implementation of monetary policy
can be classified into two broad categories. The first draws on the strong theoretical
traditions that began in the early twentieth century with Keynes and Friedman on the role,
conduct and impact of monetary policy in relation to the business cycle. While the second,
irrespective of the theoretical preferences of a monetary policy committee (MPC) or its
members, relies heavily on deriving a common view of our best guess of the current state of
the global and domestic economy. This view, in turn, influences how we think about the
future of the economy, and more specifically, the various channels of the monetary
transmission mechanism. It is the latter that will be my main focus here.
MPCs, routinely review various parts of the whole financial and economic landscape before
every meeting to ensure that policy decisions are predicated on a comprehensive
understanding of the key factors that influence the economy. These include several
important areas such as the state of the global macro economy, the nature of domestic and
international markets, the financial sector, critical developments in the real economy and the
official forecast.
Being a small open economy, it is not surprising that our starting point for domestic monetary
policy originates from the global economy. Our assessment of global economic conditions
has two important objectives. The first is to give us a sense, in general terms, of the state of
global economy via the interaction of inflation and growth rates, as well as other policy
variables such as output gaps and the change in real interest rates in a variety of countries.
This then provides the basis for our understanding of how a complex interplay of political
developments and other economic policies influence our view of the global economic
outlook. The second is more specific and relates to the economic behaviour of our main
1
trading partners and their impact on our potential to export goods and services as well as our
ability to attract foreign funds and investment. Our assessment of global developments also
extends to our understanding of international financial and asset markets, as these have an
in important bearing on investor sentiment and associated portfolio flows in and out of our
economy.
Against, the backdrop of intricate global economic developments, we then focus on several
important aspects in our assessment of the domestic economy. These include efforts to
elucidate the complex nature of the financial markets and financial intermediation on
economic activity, and more importantly how this relates to investor sentiment and consumer
confidence. Both of which are viewed as critical in our assessment of the factors that
influence investment decisions by residents and non-residents alike.
The interface between the real and the financial sector is another critical element in our
policy decision making process. In the past, the growth in broad money supply was an
important indicator of economic activity but this has more recently been eclipsed by the
credit lending mechanism and the appropriate level of credit. The growing importance of
credit extension is fairly obvious in that it has the ability to constrain economic growth, and
even create unsustainable leverage or fragility in the economy. This analysis is largely
manifested in the review of loans and advances from the banking sector to the households
and non-financial corporations. Moreover, our assessment of monetary and credit
aggregates as well as the flow-of-funds statistics provides a unique perspective on whether
developments in the financial sector, are a symptom, cause or consequence of changes in
the real economy. It is worth noting that the financial statistics are expanded to cover both
the banks and the non-bank financial intermediaries. In addition, much emphasis is placed
on the current and expected state of public finances, as well as the impact of fiscal policy
initiatives in relation to the implementation of monetary policy actions. Movements in
government consumption and production and how these contribute to quarterly GDP
estimates are also important to the national accounts framework which I discuss later on.
As far as the tracking of the real economy is concerned, we measure the pulse and the state
of the domestic economy through a comprehensive array of statistics and sentiment
indicators, which includes the balance of payments statistics, labour market and other high
frequency real economic indicators. Naturally, our ability to make a suitable assessment of
the domestic economy is dependent on the reliability, and timeliness of the various
indicators.
There are a few important issues to take note of here, and that is, although the pace of near
term growth is informed by the national accounts framework, we as the MPC, are also
2
interested in the many other variables that are linked to the national accounts. These would
include the current trend and composition of the national savings rate, the extent of the
domestic household debt to disposable income ratio and other related stock and flow
indicators. For example, it is important for us to determine to what extent private
consumption expenditure is funded by more debt or an increase in real income.
The entire framework of the national accounts is estimated from the production, factor
income and expenditure side and provides an almost `general equilibrium like framework’ for
the economy. This has the added advantage that it allows us to gain a better perspective of
the stance of the economy from different vantage points. Understanding components of
expenditure, is central to getting to grips with growth leavers. One of the most important
components are movements in fixed capital formation. Critical as these are, it is often the
most difficult variable to get robust results from firm surveys.
The national accounts framework extends to the balance of payments which not only forms a
significant part of expenditure side of the national accounts, but also plays an important role
as a critical interface between the trade and financial accounts. Needless to say, the
assessment includes an in depth analysis of the economic fundamentals that determines the
trade balance, as well as the vulnerability or stability on the financial account in the form of
capital flows to and from the country.
The inflation targeting monetary policy framework is essentially forward looking, and would
be extremely difficult to implement without the timely and accurate measurement of the
consumer price index (CPI). While the basket of goods and services in the CPI is
comprehensive in scope, it is the origin of emerging inflationary pressure that remains the
most challenging for the MPC. This has become more prominent of late as the growing
proportion of services in the consumption basket has introduced a whole new dimension to
our understanding of pricing behaviour. For instance, the trend in services inflation is
generally less prone to fluctuations related to the business cycle and supply side shocks
than the consumer goods and durable components of the CPI.
In addition, Stats SA have also recently redesigned the producer price index, which is
another important progressive step in enhancing the statistical base on which we make
decisions. Instead of providing a single aggregate PPI figure, the new methodology focuses
more on how a variety of final and intermediate manufactured prices, commodities and other
input costs such as electricity and water transmit inflationary pressure through to the
economy. As a result the current PPI, unlike its predecessor, distinguishes between input
and output prices and does not provide an aggregation of the two.
3
Needless to say, a very important part of our flexible inflation targeting approach is to gain a
better understanding of the trend and relationship between real growth and employment. In
the case of the latter, we analyse the unemployment rate very carefully in an attempt to
assess how much of our unemployment is cyclical and how much is structural. The MPC
also closely monitors the change to unit labour costs and the pace of productivity growth as
these are considered important variables in the price formation process over the longer term.
Making sense of the data is partly a function of how credible the data is, whether the
measurement of the same universe gives conflicting evidence or not. When we see a new
trend, notwithstanding well-developed methods of seasonal adjustment we still have to be
sure that we are separating signal from noise.
Naturally, in a forward looking inflation targeting environment, our assessment of the current
and future state of the economy culminates in the forecasting process. Seeing that we are
here for a forecasting award, let me now focus the attention on the forecasting process;- not
so much in the abstract, but to rather give you a real appreciation of the many difficulties we
face.
The monetary policy statements released by the SARB after each meeting devote a great
deal of time to explain our forecasts for headline inflation, core-inflation and future growth
prospects. For good reason, these estimates guide our view of the future and in the process
provide a suitable assessment of the balance of risks to the forecast. Not only are the
projections important for monetary policy decision making, but they also provide a useful
communication tool to the public.
At this juncture, it may be useful to take a step back and ask what is so important about a
reliable and consistent forecast and how exactly do monetary policy practitioners make use
of this tool. Understandably, the key focus of the forecast relates to the numbers that the
public tend to monitor closely. While I have no intention of trivialising the numbers or
magnitudes generated by the model as these reflect important information about the pace,
and change in the economy, it is really the interpretation and awareness of what the results
suggest that remains most important for monetary policy decision making.
Structural models and forecasts remain critical to our understanding of how the economy
works, and as a result, many central banks have made large investments to gain an insight
to the interaction of the various channels in the transmission mechanism that these types of
models generally provide. This in itself is a very important exercise in its own right, and the
model is built to reflect the unique characteristics and behavioural patterns of agents in the
South African economy. The model can then be used to illustrate the possible effects and
4
consequences of simultaneous shocks to the economy. These would include how the
domestic economy responds to supply side shocks in the form of a hypothetical rapid
increase in oil and food prices and a depreciation of the currency. In the process the model
provides valuable insight to a variety of indicators such as the exchange rate pass through,
the extent of the output gap and the sensitivity of domestic growth to global growth within a
theoretically consistent framework.
Naturally, our models focus on a many key economic variables, but for obvious reasons our
assessment of the outlook is centred on the expected trend of headline inflation and real
GDP growth. Revisions of our forecasts are based primarily on new data and a change to
our key assumptions. In the case of growth, the revision may have been caused by a
change to the starting point and/or the projected growth prospects of our major trading
partner countries. The starting point is hence often estimated for the current quarter, as we
as all other private sector forecasters, eagerly await Stats SA’s official GDP numbers that
are only released eight weeks after the quarter has commenced. In addition, these growth
numbers are also subject to sometimes large revisions. On our assessment of global growth
prospects, we do not reinvent the wheel but rather rely heavily on our peers who invest more
resources on their projections on the global economy. Therefore, much of our time and
effort is used to determine the impact that these changes may have on our own economy.
Several important factors influence our outlook for inflation. These include our assumptions
about commodity prices, exchange rates, unit labour costs and the extent to which the
economy is performing below or above its level of potential, otherwise known as the output
gap. Generally, all these variables are extremely difficult to forecast, and the exchange rate
is notoriously renowned for its degree of difficulty. In a similar fashion, the same can be said
about oil and food price increases that are often determined by geo-political conflict and
droughts and not so much by pure economic fundamentals.
A simple question often posed to the MPC relates to what the true value of the forecast is if it
is constantly revised as new information becomes available. Some sceptics would say the
main value of forecasts are the very assumptions you impose on the model, and that by
getting these wrong the forecast becomes a failure. My simple response to this rhetoric is
that what matters most is what our economists are well trained to do, and that relates to how
well the economy is forecast on the basis of the full information set that was available at the
time of the forecast. For example, were all the influential factors that could potentially alter
the forecast highlighted and taken into consideration, or was the assessment of the balance
of risk appropriate for that point in time. I believe it is rather these criteria to which the
5
forecast should be judged and not so much the conventional way in which the forecast value
is compared to the final outcome.
In conclusion, the key challenge for research in the context of regular monetary policy
meetings is to ensure there is consistency in the analysis and interpretation of the highly
fragmented and complex information set that becomes available over time. As we continue
to improve our analysis of the state of the economy, there are a few things that will occupy
us over the next few years. Some channels such as the trade and to a limited extent the
financial flows are reasonably well established in our analysis and factored in the models,
but these will need to be augmented by the complex nature of international spill-over effects
and the potential consequences of further international banking and financial sector
constraints.
In view of the growing importance of financial stability to monetary policy, the analytical
demands placed on economists have intensified as we come to grips with issues related to
asset price behaviour and their link to the real economy. In particular, housing and its
impact on confidence, wealth creation and household vulnerability has become central to the
business cycle and cannot be ignored in any monetary policy making process. This extends
to other areas such as the balance sheet analysis of households, financial and non- financial
corporations as well as government. After all, any understanding of the cause and
consequence of the financial crisis would begin with a critical assessment of the balance
sheets of the financial sector.
To really gain perspective on the true stance of the economy is not a trivial exercise as it
requires strong research capacity, a really good appreciation of the statistical methods used
and what the release of preliminary data implies. All of this cannot be achieved without the
presence of an excellent statistical infrastructural environment. Beyond this is the challenge
of enriching our analysis to include more cooperation and interaction with key stakeholders
in the economy. One way of doing this is to interact with the economic agents across all
sectors and regions of the economy. This type of intelligence gathering on the current state
and outlook for the domestic economy across business and industry can be valuable in the
detection of possible early warning signals prior to the release of the official statistics and
data. As a result, this approach has evolved to become an integral part of monetary policy
formulation in many central banks across the globe, and countries such as the UK, Canada
and Australia have often remarked on the benefits of the process.
Lastly, I wish to thank you for the kind opportunity to address this audience
6