Titulo: Address by Francois Groepe, Deputy Governor, South African Reserve Bank at the Credit Suisse Economics and Strategy Conference, Cape Town, 11 October 2013
Data: 2013-10-11
Palestrante (estimado): Francois Groepe
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2013/389
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2013/389/Keynote-Address-by-Deputy-Governor-Francois-Groepe.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Address by Francois Groepe, Deputy Governor
South African Reserve Bank
at the Credit Suisse Economics and Strategy Conference, Cape Town,
11 October 2013
1. Introduction
Good morning ladies and gentlemen and welcome to the fairest cape, or as
Sir Francis Drake so named it, “the fairest Cape in all the circumference of the earth”.
Thank you to Credit Suisse for the invitation to address you at this year’s conference.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) annual meetings are drawing to a close, and
both the World Economic Outlook and Global Financial Stability Report have already
been released. There have also been a series of G-20 and BRICS meetings taking
place alongside the annual meetings. I am quite sure that there is no lack of topics to
discuss and quite high on this list, most likely, is the slowdown in emerging market
economies, and the recent volatility in financial markets related to the possibility of
asset tapering by the United States’ Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).
These are both issues which we watch closely, given the potential effect on South
Africa’s economic prospects.
Given the title of the conference, I thought it may be useful to talk more generally
around economic developments in emerging markets, touch on South Africa’s current
account deficit and end-off with brief remarks on the monetary policy situation in
South Africa.
1
2. Emerging markets start to sputter
Over the past five years, emerging market economies have been trying to deal with
their new found status of being the main driver of activity on financial markets by
virtue of these economies providing the impetus to global growth as advanced
economies stuttered along. In general, capital flows into these economies were
supported by both push (very accommodative monetary policy in advanced
economies) and pull (stronger economic fundamentals in emerging market countries)
factors. There was no shortage of liquidity and capital flowed into local currency
bond and equity markets. With low growth and near zero policy rates in advanced
economies, emerging markets naturally became a much more enticing proposition.
The US economy seemed quite some way off from any kind of recovery that could
prompt the Federal Reserve to reverse course on asset tapering, while both the euro
area and Japan remained in the doldrums.
It would appear that the pendulum has now swung. Recent economic indicators
would seem to suggest that there have been improvements in both the housing and
labour markets in the US, and that the US economy may in fact provide the stimulus
for global growth going forward. Even Japan is performing somewhat stronger with
tentative signs that Abenomics may be supportive of growth and bringing to an end
years of deflation. In addition, the euro area emerged from recession in the second
quarter of this year. Are these recoveries in fact recoveries and if so, are they
sustainable? Only time will tell, but there is the matter of the looming debt ceiling in
the US, while the euro area, although out of recession remains very fragile.
These developments are reflected in the IMF’s latest World Economic Outlook, which
paints a somewhat different picture than it did at the start of the year, and portends
that going forward, indeed the impulse to global growth is likely to come mainly from
the advanced economies, in particular the US. World output for both 2013 and 2014
has been revised lower by 0.3 and 0.2 percentage points, respectively, to 2.9 and
3.6 per cent. Much of this downward revision, however, emanates from lower growth
prospects in emerging markets, where growth for 2013 and 2014 has been lowered
by 0.5 and 0.4 percentage points, respectively. Quite strikingly, there is a significant
2
lowering in growth forecasts for Developing Asia, in particular, India, followed by
Latin America, while that for advanced economies have been left largely unchanged,
save a minor downward revision in the US growth rate. It is important to note that
despite this slowdown in emerging markets, they will continue to account for the bulk
of global growth.
In contrast, Sub-Saharan Africa, which has displayed remarkable growth throughout
the crisis, is expected to be amongst the strongest growing regions, with growth of
5.0 per cent and 6.0 per cent expected for 2013 and 2014, respectively. South
Africa’s growth expectations are less robust, with the IMF predicting growth of 2.0 per
cent and 2.9 per cent for the same periods. The less robust growth in South Africa is
partly a function of it being much more integrated into the world economy, through
trade and financial linkages, thereby making it more vulnerable to developments
abroad, both in advanced economies and emerging markets. In addition, there are
domestic factors which constrain our ability to grow, such as rigidities in product and
labour markets, high real wage growth, infrastructure bottlenecks particularly power
and transportation and high levels of unemployment. There is no denying that these
are very crucial issues which need to be addressed and that there is an urgency to
implement the National Development Plan.
Although emerging market economies are expected to slow, the IMF notes that the
anticipated slowdown is hardly “big” or unusual and in fact extremely mild compared
to other slowdowns in earlier years. The WEO notes that a large part of the
slowdown can be attributed to cyclical factors, in particular the fading of significant
stimulus provided at the onset of the crisis; the decline in commodity prices and
slowing in global export demand. In addition to cyclical factors, potential growth has
also fallen, owing to structural impediments. It is interesting to note that among the
BRICS economies, it is only China and Russia where the five-year ahead growth
forecasts are markedly lower than the 1998 – 2013 average, which the IMF attributes
to “less relevant” growth models.
3
Clearly, the push and pull factors I referred to earlier seem to be reversing. Not only
is the economic situation in emerging markets looking less stellar, but uncertainty
around asset tapering is causing volatility in capital flows and heightened financial
market volatility, but with a clear bias to less inflows as compared to previous years.
We cannot predict how the market may react to the exit from unconventional
monetary policy when it eventually arrives, although we have had perhaps a snippet
of this. What we do know is that there are substantial risks that such an exit could
create significant negative spillovers for emerging market economies. In a speech at
Jackson Hole, Christine Lagarde1, Managing Director of the IMF, posed the question
“how should non-unconventional monetary policy countries prepare and react to the
exit from unconventional monetary policy?” She outlined various measures and
policies that can be used in this respect, namely:
 Exchange rate flexibility combined with some market intervention to moderate
exchange rate volatility and short-term liquidity pressures;
 Micro- and macro-prudential measures to slowdown excess credit growth and
prevent financial sector vulnerabilities;
 Capital flow management measures;
 Swap line facilities; and
 Utilisation of the various precautionary or liquidity facilities the Fund makes
available.
As you all would be aware, South Africa has a flexible exchange rate regime and this
has served as an important adjustment mechanism through the crisis. We did not
implement any capital flow measures, neither did we intervene in the foreign
exchange market, although we did, at times use the opportunity presented by strong
capital inflows to build our reserves. In the event of disorderly movements in the
rand exchange rate, careful consideration would be given to such measures, taking
into account a cost/benefit analysis, expectations of likelihood of success and country
specific circumstances.
1 The Global Calculus of Unconventional Monetary Policies, Christine Lagarde, Jackson Hole, 23 August 2013
4
Lagarde highlights the importance of international policy coordination and
cooperation to improve global outcomes. Bank of England, Deputy
Governor Charlie Bean2, in a panel discussion in Jackson Hole, did not necessarily
believe that better coordination was a viable option, but instead called for clearer
communication around policy intentions. The recommendation of the Committee on
International Economic Policy and Reform3, that large-country central banks should
pay more attention to their collective policy stance and the global implications, and
where appropriate should consider coordinated action to help stabilise the global
economy in times of stress, seems reasonable. This did happen at the height of the
crisis, when various advanced economy and emerging market central banks
implemented swap line facilities with the US Federal Reserve Bank. In this respect,
cooperation in various global groupings such as the G-20 and BRICS, becomes very
important.
That clear communication from central banks is important, goes without saying. In a
sense, although the comments in May of this year by US Fed Chairman Bernanke
regarding possible asset tapering may have caused a great deal of mayhem in
financial markets, it also helps to prepare markets for actual tapering, such that when
it eventually arrives, it may have a less dramatic impact - a case of “sell the rumour
and buy the fact”. Recent events have shown that some degree of tapering was
priced into markets and therefore the actual action, may indeed be less market
moving than expected. Certainly, the US Fed’s decision at the September 2013
meeting not to taper, for whatever reason - be it an unexpected tightening in financial
conditions through the rise in Treasury yields, or concerns over the handling of the
looming debt ceiling – was somewhat of a surprise to the markets, but once again
highlights the importance of clear and credible communication, where practical.
2 Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy at the Bank of England, Panel Remarks: Global Aspects of Unconventional Monetary
Policies, Jackson Hole, 24 August 2013
3 Rethinking Central banking, Brookings Institute, Washington DC, 2011
5
3. Unsustainable deficits?
Why is all this important for South Africa? The slowdown in emerging market
economies, together with a still fragile euro zone economy, does not bode well for
South Africa’s growth going forward. We have seen a noticeable gain over the past
number of years in South Africa’s exports to other emerging markets, such that they
now account for over 40 per cent of South Africa’s merchandise exports. China
became South Africa’s largest trading partner in 2009. The slowdown in emerging
market economies, in particular China, and the resultant impact on demand for
commodities and commodity prices, has placed pressure on South Africa’s exports,
and this was reflected in second quarter balance of payments figures.
As in the past, this has once more thrown the spotlight on the sustainability of South
Africa’s external position. Assistant Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia,
Guy Debelle, noted that current account deficits have a pretty poor reputation, but
went on to say that deficits are not always and everywhere a bad thing,
notwithstanding the pejorative connotation of the word deficit4. The IMF5 adds that a
flexible policy framework – such as a flexible exchange rate regime, a higher degree
of openness, export diversification, and coherent fiscal and monetary policies –
combined with financial sector development could help a country with persistent
deficits be less vulnerable to a reversal by allowing greater room for better shock
absorption.
South Africa has been running current account deficits since 1994, with a deficit as
high a 7.2 per cent being registered in 2008. It was only in the early 2000s that
South Africa had small surpluses. The current account deficits in South Africa over
the past few years can largely be related to the infrastructure programme, which we
at the central bank continuously point out serve to improve capacity and hence the
economic growth prospects of the country.
4 In Defence of current account deficits, Address at ADBI/UNISA Workshop on Growth and Integration in Asia, 8 July 2011
5 Current Account Deficits: Is there a problem, 28 March 2012
6
Looking purely at the most recent figures, in the second quarter, South Africa
recorded a current account deficit of 6.5 per cent of GDP. Although the weaker rand
did lift the rand price of exports in volume terms, exports did not perform too well,
despite a generally more favourable global environment. Exports were held back by
weaker international commodity price and supply side constraints in some of the
major sectors in the South African economy. The deterioration in the terms of trade
further compounded matters.
With a low savings rate, made up largely of corporate savings, foreign capital to
finance the deficits becomes even more important. Corporate savings declined in the
second quarter owing to weaker operating surpluses linked to weaker commodity
prices, and companies therefore finding themselves having to dip into savings.
Combined with the decline in savings, there were widespread outflows of capital from
emerging markets, which was also reflected on South Africa’s financial account of the
Balance of Payments. The financial account recorded a net inflow of capital of just
over R39 billion in the second quarter of this year as compared to a net inflow of
R56 billion in the first quarter. There was a net inflow of foreign direct investment
while a net outflow of portfolio investments in the second quarter of 2013. Combined,
the current account deficit and movements in the financial account resulted in
moderate deficit in the overall Balance of Payments position which was further
reflected in the weaker exchange rate.
Should we be overly worried about South Africa’s current account deficit, especially
in light of the slowdown in emerging markets and weaker capital inflows? Although
the current account deficit is expected to take a little longer to adjust, and the
slowdown in emerging markets may weaken an important source of demand for
South Africa’s exports, the depreciated rand may ultimately translate into a narrowing
deficit, via the J-curve effect, benefitting both exporters and manufacturers competing
against imports. The relatively unchanged Sub-Saharan Africa growth forecasts of
4.9 per cent and 6.0 per cent expected over the next two years could help underpin
demand for South African exports. Furthermore, a growing US economy will be
supportive of the global economy and may help to buffer the impact of slower growth
in emerging markets. Monthly trade numbers, since the second quarter, have shown
7
an improvement in trade deficits. Furthermore, while asset tapering may constrain
foreign portfolio inflows, this will hopefully not be too dramatic and buffered by local
investor interest.
4. Monetary Policy
Monetary Policy across the globe is heading in different directions. Asset tapering by
the US Fed, even though it did not happen in September, is still likely to happen
sooner rather than later, while a number of emerging market countries have started
to tighten policy. South Africa has maintained a steady repo rate since July 2012
when the repo rate was cut by 50 basis points to 5.0 per cent. We continue to face a
dilemma, that is, trying to balance the risks of a weaker economy with that of a less
favourable outlook for inflation.
Domestic economic growth, as measured by gross domestic expenditure, reflected a
modest improvement in the second quarter, driven by an expansion in investment by
the private sector, as well as a slight uptick in household consumption expenditure.
The outlook for household consumption expenditure remains uncertain, as high wage
settlements and positive wealth effects may be counterbalanced by low employment
creation, high debt levels and rising administered prices.
At the most recent Monetary Policy Committee meeting, the Bank maintained its
growth forecasts for 2013 of 2.0 per cent, and 3.3 per cent for 2014. The negative
output gap has widened further, given that growth has been below the potential rate
of 3.5 per cent. Therefore, demand driven inflationary pressures remain largely
contained.
However, the Bank’s inflation forecast has been steadily deteriorating. I should
caution that the most recent deterioration in inflation forecasts, as reflected in the
September MPC statement, was largely reflective of the weaker exchange rate of the
rand at the time of the MPC meeting. The rand has appreciated since, but we are
conscious that in this environment the significant amount of uncertainty relating to the
tapering of the US Fed’s asset purchase program means that volatility will likely
8
remain high. Wage settlements, food prices, and the exchange rate pose the most
significant upside risks to the inflation outlook. Nonetheless, all else being equal, the
breach of the inflation target band that we have observed in the last two readings is
expected to be temporary, with inflation expected to decelerate as from the
September reading.
With so much uncertainty and such divergences in monetary policy across the globe,
it becomes difficult to navigate the waters. However, we remain committed to our
mandate of securing low and stable inflation in the interest of balanced and
sustainable growth. No doubt the task ahead will be challenging, but as always, it is
important to keep calm and look through the noise.
I thank you and wish you a successful conference further.
9