Titulo: Vote of thanks by Ms Maria Ramos, the Chief Executive Officer of Barclays Africa Group at the annual Ordinary General Meeting of the shareholders of the South African Reserve Bank held on 25 July 2014
Data: 2014-07-25
Palestrante (estimado): Maria Ramos
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/governor's-address-to-shareholders/2014/416
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/governor%27s-address-to-shareholders/2014/416/SARBAGMVoteOfThanks.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Vote of thanks by Ms Maria Ramos, the Chief Executive Officer of Barclays
Africa Group at the annual Ordinary General Meeting of the shareholders of the
South African Reserve Bank held on 25 July 2014
On behalf of the shareholders of the South African Reserve Bank, I would like to
extend our heartfelt thanks and appreciation to the Bank; and in particular to you,
Governor Marcus, as well as to the deputy governors, the staff of the Bank and the
Board of Directors. We are deeply grateful for the exemplary manner in which today’s
AGM was conducted.
The commitment and professionalism with which the Bank conducts its business is
fundamentally important, not only to us as shareholders, but also to the rest of South
Africa. The quality of the work that has gone into preparing for today’s meeting, as well
as the excellence of the Annual Report that was produced, is greatly appreciated. You
have certainly set a new benchmark for excellence.
The Annual Report provides an excellent account of the SARB’s execution against its
primary objective, which is to maintain price stability in the interests of balanced growth
and sustainable economic development in South Africa. This is not an easy task given
the complexities and challenges we face in the domestic economy, as well as the
pervading volatility, uncertainty, and indeed the fragility of the global environment we
operate in.
Reading through the Annual Report reminds us that these are difficult times for the
custodians of monetary policy in South Africa, and indeed the rest of the world.
Governor Marcus has displayed great skill and wisdom in steering us through very
trying times.
The Annual Report actually also provides us with a very good review of the areas of
strategic focus for the SARB, and I was particularly pleased to get a deeper
understanding of the amount of investment that has gone into building capacity by
upskilling people in the Bank. This is real investment for the future, particularly in a
knowledge economy like ours.
Page | 1
Let me conclude by saying that today’s meeting is testimony to the fact that the SARB
is living by its values of accountability, excellence, integrity, respect and trust, as well
as open communication. We all owe you an immense depth of gratitude, Governor
Marcus, for your outstanding leadership of this Bank; and to your deputy governors for
your commitment, professionalism and the leadership you have shown in making sure
that we conduct monetary policy in our country in a manner that ensures that this
institution stands out as a beacon of professionalism and excellence at a time when
this is really needed. Just seven years short of its 100th anniversary and as the oldest
central bank in Africa, you have embedded traditions that would serve the SARB well
for the next 100 years.
Thank you very much, not just on behalf of the shareholders, but also on behalf of
South Africa.
Page | 2