Titulo: Address by Mr Leon Myburgh, Head: Financial Markets Department, South African Reserve Bank, at the Africa Sovereign Funds Roundtable, Cape Town
Data: 2015-02-27
Palestrante (estimado): Leon Myburgh
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2015/429
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-senior-management/2015/429/Speech-SF-Roundtable-2015.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Address by Mr Leon Myburgh
Head: Financial Markets Department
Africa Sovereign Funds Roundtable
Cape Town, 27 February 2015
Introduction
Good morning. It is a pleasure for me to address this Annual Sovereign Funds
Roundtable hosted by the Sovereign Investor Institute and Institutional Investor, and
to continue where yesterday’s presentations and debates left off. Management of
foreign exchange reserves and other sovereign funds have indeed become a highly
challenging task in the past few years. It is an environment for which economics and
finance textbooks did not prepare us, like negative interest rates, quantitative easing
and long-term forward guidance on monetary policy. In my remarks today, I will first
briefly allude to how these international developments have come to influence
economic and policy developments, including reserves management, in South
Africa. Before discussing how reserves managers can look for alternative
investments, in particular in sub-Saharan African countries, I shall then dwell in
somewhat more detail on how the SA Reserve Bank handles the issue of capital
preservation in a world of ever-declining yields.
Economic environment and challenges for South Africa
The economic situation facing South Africa, as well as a large number of emerging
economies, remains rather challenging. Six years after the “Great Recession”
triggered by the global financial crisis, the domestic economy has yet to return to the
pace of growth that prevailed in the middle of the previous decade. In the last five
years, real GDP growth in South Africa has averaged only 2,4 per cent per annum,
compared with 4,8 per cent over the 2002-07 period. Furthermore, the long-awaited
1
meaningful acceleration in activity remains elusive, and year after year, both official
and private sector forecasters have kept scaling down their growth prospects for the
year ahead. For example, at the beginning of 2013, the SA Reserve Bank
anticipated 3,8 per cent growth in 2014 but recent estimates show the economy only
grew by 1,5 per cent. Similarly, at the time of the January 2014 Monetary Policy
Committee meeting, the Bank anticipated growth of 3,3 per cent in 2015; this
projection has now been scaled down to 2,2 per cent. And the National Treasury’s
2015 Budget, released two days ago, only foresees GDP growth of 2,0 per cent this
year and 2,4 per cent next.
Yet several developments would appear supportive of stronger growth. Both nominal
and real policy rates are still near decades’ lows, even after the cumulative 75 basis-
point increase in the repo rate in 2014. Admittedly, the recent decline in headline
inflation has pushed the ex-post real repo rate back into positive territory. However,
when compared to inflation expectations one-year ahead (5,9 per cent according to
the Bloomberg consensus) or the Reserve Bank’s own forecast for 2016 inflation of
5,4 per cent, the real policy rate remains near zero. Loose global financial conditions
have pushed capital flows toward higher-yielding markets and thereby providing
financing for our fiscal and current account deficits. Another consequence of this
“search for yield” has been to boost prices of South African financial assets; thus,
long-term bond yields and earnings yields on JSE-listed equities are unusually low,
easing the cost of financing for both public and private sector. Finally, both actual
and expected inflation have displayed more stability than in earlier cycles, despite a
pronounced depreciation of the rand over the past three years.
So then, why is South Africa still mired in what can only be described as subdued
growth, compared to the type of expansion that would be needed to make a
significant dent in domestic unemployment? Why is the economy failing to produce
the pace of growth that would help reduce public debt ratios? According to the
Budget, this ratio will only stabilize in 2017/18, despite a tightening in the fiscal
stance worth about R52 billion, or 1,7 per cent of last year’s GDP, over the next two
years. Part of the answer lies in global conditions, and the disappointing
performance of the world economy in 2014. Just like domestic growth forecasts that
were scaled down, so were forecasts for most of the world’s largest economies. But
2
domestic factors also played a key role, not least structural factors such as electricity
shortages and insufficient skills development. The decline in prices of South Africa’s
major commodity exports for most of 2013-14 also weighed on economic activity,
dampening corporate sector earnings, undermining employment and fixed
investment prospects, and keeping the current account deficit at an elevated level.
Will the global environment be more supportive in 2015 and 2016? At first glance,
several factors appear encouraging. International institutions project somewhat
faster global growth, albeit with downside risks. For example, in its January update to
the World Economic Outlook, the IMF expected world output to accelerate to 3,5 per
cent in 2015 and 3,7 per cent next year, from 3,3 per cent in 2014. At the same time,
the lower oil price will bring relief to consumers and producers alike.
However, the global environment will continue to bring challenges. First of all, the
global economic outlook remains both uncertain and uneven across major regions.
For example, indications point to a continued moderation and re-balancing of the
Chinese economy, which may further weigh on the outlook for industrial
commodities, offsetting in part the benefits to South Africa from cheaper oil. At the
same time, monetary policy divergences between the major economies may cause
tensions within the global financial system, including significant currency shifts as
witnessed by the marked appreciation in the US dollar since mid-2014.
Such potential developments complicate the task of a central bank like the SA
Reserve Bank, not only in its role as monetary policymaker but equally in its role as a
manager of official reserves. How should a central bank address cross-currency
volatility, and in particular deal with US dollar appreciation at a time when the trend
has been towards a diversification to non-dollar currencies? How can a central bank
improve its return on reserves in the current low-yield environment, without
jeopardizing its prudential mandate? How should it protect itself against a possible
rise in risk and term premiums across a broad range of assets? These are questions
I will now attempt to answer, with reference to the Reserve Bank’s experience.
Investment of central bank reserves and risk management
3
The solid growth in the SA Reserve Bank’s foreign currency reserves portfolio over
the past decade, from what was initially a negative level when netted off with the
oversold forward foreign exchange position, was primarily due to reserve
accumulation during a phase of strong foreign capital inflows throughout the pre-
crisis boom years. However, market conditions have changed considerably. With
world economic growth still in the doldrums, capital inflows have become more
volatile and public finances are more stretched. This means that not only is it more
challenging to accumulate reserves due to the higher cost of holding reserves, but
managing them has become complicated.
In the past, capital preservation, which is the key objective of official foreign
exchange reserves management, was achieved with relative ease by investing in
fixed income securities and holding them to maturity or enjoying capital gains as
yields fell in response to improving credit profiles. The opposite scenario has
prevailed in recent years. Credit ratings for many government, government agencies
and corporations have been downgraded, reflecting less certainty about timely
receipt of principal and interest. Loss sharing between taxpayers and investors in the
event of a bail-out of a failed bank, or even when governments are bailed out
themselves, has become accepted practice. It is a world where the safe-haven
status of bonds has become eroded, at least in perception, if not in practice.
This leaves us with the key question of what should comprise a strategic asset
allocation in order to achieve capital preservation, or indeed whether we need to
redefine how we interpret and pursue capital preservation.
Interpreted literally, capital preservation means ensuring that you do not incur a loss.
By extension, it means reserve managers have very limited appetite to be exposed
to risk. However, what is a central bank to do when it must take risk simply to
prevent making a loss or to preserve capital, as is the case now with negative yields
in the highly-rated countries such as Germany? In this case, a purchaser will get less
money back than what it invested in the first place, and so, capital is lost.
The most common response to lower and negative yields has been for reserves
managers to lengthen the benchmark duration of the portfolio. By lengthening
4
duration, fund managers want to enjoy the benefit of the higher-yielding longer dated
assets. In doing so, one can avoid the very low or even negative interest rates seen
in the front part of the curve. Another common way to achieve the higher yield is to
introduce more risky assets in the portfolio, either through investing in new asset
classes like mortgage-backed securities, or to lower the minimum acceptable credit
rating for issuers and deposit-taking counterparties. However, all of these actions
introduce new forms of risk, ones which not too many years ago were seen as
unpalatable. Very specifically, lengthening duration while yields are at historic lows
introduces significant risk to the portfolio at a time when the debate is on the timing
of normalization in US policy rates. And the same can be said of lowering the credit
standards as credit spreads are tight by historical standard, for as the policy rates
normalize, these spreads are at risk of widening.
This is the nucleus of the paradox facing reserves managers. If we chase flat or
positive returns at all cost, we introduce the very risks that we have tried to avoid for
so many years. So the question becomes whether we should view capital
preservation as an absolute or relative principle. If it is absolute, then the reserves
manager must pursue non-negative returns at all cost. However, perhaps some
consideration should be given to risk-adjusted returns, and if the risk is deemed too
high, then one should simply accept negative returns in the short term and enjoy the
benefit of the better risk profile. In such a paradigm, buying German bonds with
negative yields could be seen as more prudent than searching for higher yielding
bonds when there is a reasonable risk of a higher negative total return due to
revaluation effects.
Does this mean there is no room for riskier assets in a reserves portfolio, as we are
now willing to hold negative yielding assets? The answer lies in the level of
reserves, the income and capital appreciation needs, and the risk tolerance of the
reserves manager. For a central bank with reserves lower than its ability to cover its
short term known and contingent obligations (referred to here as the core reserve
requirement), its efforts must be towards ensuring that it keeps it reserves liquid and
freely available for meeting obligations. Central banks who find themselves in this
position will have limited room to enhance returns through the diversification into
riskier assets. The currency composition for this category of central bank should be
derived from the currency of its potential and actual obligations and the typical
5
instrument would be bank deposits, Treasury bills, short-term government and
agency bonds.
A central bank that has reserves in excess of this core requirement can consider
investing the extra portion in assets that offer higher yields, although these must still
be liquid enough to liquidate should the need arise. The ideal overall return objective
for reserves management is typically to ensure that the overall return covers the cost
of holding the reserves. However, this objective should be pursued with due
consideration to risk, as an all-out pursuit to recover this cost may require substantial
risk taking for countries that have high domestic yields.
As the overall size of reserves increases relative to the core requirement, the central
bank may consider managing the portion of reserves that are well in excess of the
core requirement under a different regime. At a general level, one can view this as
the group of central banks who have enough reserves to cover capital outflows at a
two or more standard deviation level. This is where the role of a sovereign wealth
fund becomes relevant, or if the reserves are managed within the central bank, they
are invested with a higher return objective. The important point is that for all central
banks, we have now come to a point where the risk of capital loss due to negative
yields is a reality, but the higher the level of reserves, the greater the freedom to
apply stratified risk tolerances to negate the impact of negative yields.
How then should we express capital preservation in this environment? With yields
close to historic lows, the popular measure of Probability of Negative Returns has
become less useful. Many reserves managers will target a Probability of Negative
Returns below a certain level, based on an appropriate time horizon and confidence
interval. However, the low yields naturally increase the probability of a loss, forcing
the duration of a portfolio even shorter. Consequently, this metric has become
problematic and many central banks and other official reserves managers have
started using the conditional value-at-risk (CVaR) statistic to measure the maximum
expected loss that the reserves may incur. Its advantage is that it gives a lower
bound on the losses that may be incurred on the reserves. Therefore the CVaR
provides more certainty in in case of a “black swan” event happening.
6
At the SA Reserve Bank, as is typically the case with other central banks, we
perform risk-return simulations under different economic and stress scenarios to
determine the most suitable asset class combination within our risk tolerance. This
is commonly known as the Strategic Asset Allocation. The traditional investment
universe has been fixed income, usually government bonds. But as per the previous
discussion, central banks need to consider other asset classes that in portfolio
context would improve the risk-return profile of reserves while at the same time being
mindful of downside risks. Surveys conducted by various institutions indicate that
while some reserves managers have shifted their reserves out of the traditional
reserves currencies in search for yield, other investors are willing to keep funds in
low yielding safe-haven currencies such as the Swiss franc.
Indeed, the SA Reserve Bank recently began strategically investing in alternative
asset classes such as mortgage backed securities, covered bonds and Chinese
local-currency debt. This was done in a measured manner, through the adoption of
new risks while still recognizing the need for capital preservation. The Bank has
reviewed the separation of its reserves, which now comprise two tranches – the
Liquidity Tranche and the Investment Tranche. The Liquidity Tranche is invested in
gold, Special Drawing Rights, short-dated government bonds and cash of currencies
that represent our potential obligations. This portfolio is constructed in a manner that
allows for quick liquidation should the need arise. This tranche has a short
investment horizon and is managed with a low risk tolerance. The Investment
Tranche, while adhering to the core objective of capital preservation, is structured in
a way to achieve a higher return, subject to risk tolerance constraints prescribed by
the Bank, and has a longer investment horizon. In this Tranche, investments include
longer term government bonds, mortgage and asset backed securities, covered
bonds and corporate bonds, and allows for more diverse currency composition.
While extending the investment horizon and the introduction of new instruments and
currencies in the Investment Tranche brings new avenues to enhance the return on
overall reserves, it also creates the risk of losses over short time horizons, thereby
potentially being in conflict with the capital preservation tenet. Diversification is used
to mitigate against this risk.
7
Central banks that have accrued significant excess reserves relative to the core
requirement, have the opportunity to diversify into more risky but less correlated
assets, such as equities or even listed property. For some, this diversification may
include investing into the sub-Saharan region. However, as no African currency is
currently classified as a reserve currency, this diversification is likely to be restricted
to countries that have established sovereign wealth funds. In light of this, I would like
to conclude my speech by briefly discussing the prospects for the Sub-Saharan
African (SSA) region.
Prospects for Sub-Saharan Africa
For several years now, SSA has been the topic of many studies and analyses, and
commentators have occasionally described it as the “new frontier” or the “continent
on the move.” And there are genuine justifications for investors to look at
opportunities on the continent. First, SSA has over the past decade grown faster
than in any other decade since most African countries acceded to independence in
the 1960s: According to the World Bank, average GDP growth in 2005-14 is
estimated at 4,8 per cent, twice the average of 2,4 over the previous thirty years.
Furthermore, unlike in earlier decades, this growth has not been mostly the result of
demographic developments but, rather, of faster capital accumulation and stronger
productivity growth. It has also been more diversified than in previous growth cycles,
with faster expansion, among others, of sectors like retail, banking and mobile
telephony.
Second, growth in SSA has been relatively resilient to the Global Financial Crisis: In
2009, when the majority of the world was mired in recession, it continued to expand
by a relatively solid 2,0 per cent. Third, it has over the past ten years or so been
more stable than in the past, in part a consequence of the diversification of
economies and their reduced reliance on drought-prone agricultural production.
Fourth, it is still expected to outpace overall growth in the emerging world, helped
among others by continued strong public spending on infrastructure, as well as
sustained growth in agriculture and services. In 2015 and 2016, the IMF projects
SSA growth of 4,9 and 5,2 per cent, respectively, versus 4,3 and 4,7 per cent for
emerging market and developing economies. Fifth and finally, these factors, coupled
with the high relative returns offered by some SSA investments, have resulted in
8
recent years in frequent decoupling between these “frontier markets” and larger
emerging markets, providing an additional opportunity for risk diversification.
This improved growth performance has been matched by market returns. Generally,
equity markets continued to gain in 2014, and yields on both local and dollar bonds
have stayed low or continued to decline, though some African financial markets have
sold off of late, undermined by their exposure to the falling oil price.
Like in any investment, investors must be cognizant of the risks to the economic
outlook. I will list a few. First, SSA remains sensitive to the global economic cycle,
and in light of shifting international trade patterns over the last ten years or so – in
increasing fashion – to the BRICS economies. Second, several relatively large and
fast-growing economies will be affected by the lower oil price, although this negative
impact on the region will be in part buffeted by the boost to oil importers. In fact, in
recent years, African oil importers (excluding South Africa) had already provided a
stronger contribution to regional growth than oil exporters.
Third, some SSA countries have witnessed widening current account and budget
deficits in the recent past, driven partly by broad infrastructure spending but also by
looser public wage policies. Coupled with the region’s economies limited success in
broadening their manufacturing base and therefore not diversifying their exports, at a
time when the outlook for commodity prices remains uncertain, this exposes some of
these economies to exchange rate and asset price correction in the event that global
risk aversion suddenly adjusts higher. Finally, geo-politics and the risk of military
conflict or spreading terrorist action remains a non-negligible risk factor. While these
geo-political risks mostly affect countries within or near the Sahel region and the
Horn of Africa, other nations could also become targets of hostile action, for instance
as a result of involvement in joint peace-keeping operations.
In conclusion, I would like to stress that the SSA region is likely to keep presenting
opportunities for investors in coming years, linked to the demographic dynamics, the
structural diversification of economies, and the “catch-up” of the production process
towards the technological frontier. But such economic progress is not going to be
without hiccups, and the performances of the region’s highly diverse countries are
9
likely to reflect facets of their own idiosyncratic factors, depending among others on
policy choices, strengthening of institutions and ability to deal with a less favourable
commodity price environment. Investor differentiation has already been the norm in
the last couple of years for the more advanced emerging markets and hence, it is
increasingly likely to be the same for Africa.
Thank you.
---oOo---
10