Titulo: Address by Brian Kahn, Advisor to the Governor, to the 6th Annual Nedgroup Investments Treasurer’s Conference
Data: 2017-06-08
Palestrante (estimado): Brian Kahn
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2017/495
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2017/495/Nedgroup-Investments-Treasurers-Conference-2017.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

“Check in” from the South African Reserve Bank
Address by Brian Kahn, Advisor to the Governor,
to the 6th Annual Nedgroup Investments Treasurer’s Conference,
Summer Place, Hyde Park, 8 June 2017
Good morning, and thank you to Nedgroup Investments for the invitation to “check in” from
the South African Reserve Bank. We are facing a particularly challenging domestic
environment. The economy has entered a recession following the surprisingly negative
outcome in the first quarter of this year, and at the same time we face the prospect of further
sovereign ratings downgrades. Added to that, we are likely to have an increasingly noisy
political backdrop for the remainder of the year. Such conditions do not bode well for a near-
term improvement in business and consumer confidence. Fortunately, there are some
positives as well. The inflation outlook has improved in recent months, and the global growth
prognosis is probably the best it has been for some time. In particular, the current sentiment
towards emerging markets is favourable, with continued capital flows to these regions. But
as we know, risks remain and conditions can change very quickly.
It is against this backdrop that we have to implement monetary policy. Monetary policy acts
with a lag, so what we do today will only have its full impact on inflation over the next 18
months or so. Therefore, the inflation forecast is central to our decision-making process. We
cannot impact on today’s inflation, that is history. But today’s inflation rate is useful to the
extent that it may contain new information about the future inflation outlook, and it may also
impact on the starting point of the forecast. Monetary policy-making is not only about
calibrating the interest rate path to achieve an inflation outcome, but it is also about analysing
the risks to the forecast. The future is inherently uncertain, and the more uncertain the
environment, the more risks there are to any forecast. In my remarks to you today, I will focus
on our recent decision and outline how we view the risks to the outlook. In particular, I will
focus on how we deal with the exchange rate, as it is currently one of the key risks to the
inflation outlook. This will relate directly to how we see the recent ratings downgrades.
But first, allow me to summarise the main points from the most recent MPC statement.
1) The latest two inflation numbers surprised significantly on the downside. This was true
for both headline inflation and core inflation. CPI inflation measured 6.1% and 5.3%
in March and April, while core inflation measured 4.9% and 4.8% in these two months.
2) The headline inflation forecast improved over the short to medium term, but remains
unchanged for the outer period. We now expect an average of 5.7% and 5.3% for 2017
and 2018 rising to 5.5% in 2019. Although it is within the target range for the entire
period, it is still uncomfortably close to the upper end of the target range, at around
5.5% for the last 6 quarters of the forecast period. Our forecast did not incorporate
the most recent inflation outcomes, which were published the day before the
announcement.
3) The risks to the inflation forecast were seen to be more or less balanced. This was a
change from the previous meetings when the risks were seen to be moderately on the
upside, although we had assessed the degree of upside risk to have moderated over
the past few meetings.
2
4) The most important upside risk came from exchange rate uncertainty. However,
despite this, there was still some “fat” in the forecast, as the prevailing exchange rate
at that time was still a bit stronger than that assumed in the forecast. I will come back
to the exchange rate issue a bit later.
5) The Bank’s forecast for GDP growth was revised down for the entire forecast period,
by 0.2 percentage points for 2017 and 2018, and by 0.3 percentage points in 2019.
Annual growth rates of 1.0%, 1.5% and 1.7% for the forecast years were expected in
the forecast round. The main reason for the downward revision and continued
downside risk was the adverse impact of the sovereign credit ratings downgrade on
consumer and investor sentiment in particular. Since then we have seen the GDP
outcome for the first quarter, which, at -0.7%, surprised markedly on the downside,
reinforcing the downside risk. We are therefore likely to see a further downward
revision to our growth forecast in the next forecast round.
6) The repo rate was left unchanged. In fact, the last change was in March 2016. In the
last two meetings the vote was not unanimous, with one dissenting vote at both
meetings.
7) The MPC viewed the level of rates to be appropriate, but that we were likely at the
end of the tightening cycle. The MPC still felt that the inflation trajectory was
uncomfortably close to the upper end of the target range, and with inflation
expectations still anchored at the upper end, it means that any adverse shock could
take us quite quickly outside the target range. We noted, however, that a reduction
in rates would be possible should inflation continue to surprise on the downside and
if the forecast is assessed to be sustainably within the target range over the forecast
period. However, we cautioned that in the current environment of high levels of
3
uncertainty, the risks to the outlook could easily deteriorate. The MPC would want to
be more convinced that the improved inflation outlook could be sustained. We would
not want reduce rates, only to be forced into a premature reversal of policy.
It is not just the forecast itself that is of importance, but also how we perceive the risks to the
forecast. Any particular forecast trajectory could have a different policy outcome depending
on how we assess the risks. MPC members may have differing views of these risks, which
explains to some extent why we do not always have unanimity in the decision-making
process.
Most of these risks revolve around the assumptions regarding the exogenous variables in the
model. These risks have varied over time and in the past have included international oil prices,
food prices, and electricity tariffs. In the previous two meetings we flagged downside risk
coming from oil prices and electricity tariffs, particularly over the short to medium term,
although there is a higher degree of uncertainty regarding the electricity tariffs applicable
from mid-2018. The degree of downside risk was partly reduced by the downward revision of
the assumptions of both of these variables at the May meeting, and therefore incorporated
into the forecast itself.
The rand exchange rate has been the main upside risk for some time, although the degree of
upside risk has varied. A number of the risks that we face, for example higher US interest
rates, domestic political uncertainty, changes in global sentiment or the possibility of ratings
downgrades, affect the inflation outlook primarily through their impact on the rand. Given
4
the importance of the exchange rate I will spend some time talking about how we deal with
the exchange rate in our decision making.
It is often assumed that monetary policy is mainly about the exchange rate. This is an
overstatement. Clearly, not every large exchange rate move requires or elicits a response. If
that were the case, the interest rate path would have been highly variable, rather than the
very moderate, low volatility path that we have followed in recent years. While the exchange
rate is one of the important variables in our inflation forecast, it is not the only one and we
have to look at its impact in conjunction with the movement of other variables. And we
certainly do not conduct monetary policy with a view to impacting on the rand itself.
From a monetary policy perspective, we are also more concerned about the longer-term
trend of the exchange rate, rather than being overly focused on shorter term volatility or
noise. We know that the rand often overreacts or overshoots in response to events and then
retraces somewhat. Nevertheless, an understanding of the rand’s longer term trends is
important for our risk assessment.
The rand’s impact on inflation is dependent on the degree of pass-though. In our forecasting
models we have a pass-through co-efficient of around 0.2 i.e. a 10% depreciation will add 2
percentage points to inflation. In the past few years, however, we have seen a significantly
lower pass-through. There are different estimates that have been made by various analysts.
Our own estimates suggest a pass-through co-efficient of between 0.1 and 0.15. In effect this
means that the impact of an exchange rate change may be overstated to some extent in our
models.
5
The main reason for the decline in pass-through is probably due to the weak demand in the
economy, which makes it difficult for firms to pass through increased costs, with resulting
margin squeeze somewhere along the value chain. This suggests it may be a cyclical
phenomenon. Research at the Bank suggests that there is in fact some asymmetry with
respect to the reaction to the cycle: during a cyclical upswing, pass-through is much stronger,
whereas in a downswing, it is much weaker.
How do we deal with the exchange rate in our forecast? We make a simplifying assumption
of a stable real effective exchange rate over the forecast period. That implies an expectation
of a rand depreciation over that period in line with inflation differentials with our major
trading partners. We then use our judgement to assign a risk to this assumption, which then
feeds in to the overall risk to the inflation forecast.
The critical issue then is the level of the starting point. As a general rule, we set it at the
prevailing index level of the real exchange rate. However, if we feel that the exchange rate is
clearly over- or undervalued at that point, we may adjust that level. In other words, should
we regard the current strengthening or weakening of the rand as being temporary, we may
not adjust the assumption fully until we have greater confidence of its persistence at those
levels.
The level that we choose has an important implication for the forecast. In 2016, for example,
we saw a progressive improvement of the inflation forecast over the year. Most of this was
due to revisions to the exchange rate assumption, following a recovery of the rand. For
6
example, between January and September last year, the average headline inflation forecast
for 2016 declined from 6,8% to 6.4%; for 2017, from 7.0% to 5.8%; the peak declined from
7.8% to 6.7%; and the expected return to within the target range moved from 4th quarter of
2017 to the second quarter. During the same period, the starting point of the exchange rate
assumption appreciated by 11%. However, I should emphasise that it is not only the exchange
rate that impacts the forecast. The deterioration of the forecast in January 2017, for example,
was mainly due to an upward revision of the international oil price assumption, following the
price response to the OPEC-led supply curtailments, as well as a higher food price forecast.
More recently, the ratings downgrades in the wake of the cabinet reshuffle caused an initial
depreciation of the rand to almost R14 against the US dollar, and in our following forecast we
adjusted the assumption to a slightly weaker level. The rand subsequently recovered much of
its losses, and at the May meeting of the MPC, the rand/dollar exchange rate implicit in the
real effective exchange rate (around R13.60 against the US dollar) was in fact weaker than
the prevailing spot exchange rate at that time. The rand has remained relatively strong since.
So even if we see a moderate weakening of the rand going forward, it does not necessarily
follow that the assumption will automatically be changed, as there is some latitude for it to
move. But we also know that the rand can move significantly and very quickly in response to
shocks.
Not all of the risks to the rand are on the upside (i.e. rand weakening). The rand has been
surprisingly resilient in the past 16 months, despite the adverse domestic shocks that it has
faced. Part of the underlying support has come from improved terms of trade, driven in part
by weak oil prices and positive Chinese growth prospects which has impacted positively on
7
other commodity prices; a marked narrowing of the current account deficit, which has
reduced the perceived fragility of the rand to possible capital flow reversals; and a generally
more favourable view of emerging markets which has seen continued capital flows to these
markets as the global search for yield continues.
However, as you are all aware, there are various upside risks to the rand. Two of these are
the risk of US policy tightening, and the risk of further ratings downgrades. We get recurring
questions as to how deal with these issues in our deliberations.
For much of the past two years or so, normalisation of monetary policy in the US has been
seen as a risk to the rand. This is in part due to the strong reaction of a number of emerging
market currencies to the so-called “taper tantrum” in 2013. Since then, the US Fed has been
a lot more careful about its communication, and has emphasised the moderate nature of its
tightening cycle. For some time we flagged this as a risk to the exchange rate outlook, given
the possible impact on the direction of global capital flows, but the restrained market reaction
to the actual tightening suggested that it was mostly priced in.
The impact of Fed tightening on our monetary policy stance would depend on how it affects
the inflation forecast through the impact on the currency. We do not react one for one with
Fed moves, and we never have. We set interest rates in line with what is appropriate for our
economy. In fact, had we reacted preemptively to possible Fed tightening, we would have got
it terribly wrong. Since 2014, each year began with expectations of more aggressive tightening
than actually transpired. As it turns out, there have been only 3 increases of 25 basis points
each in December of both 2015 and 2016 and again in March this year. There is currently an
8
expectation of two further increases this year priced into the markets. Increases in line with
expectations are unlikely to have a major impact on the rand, and for this reason we have not
mentioned the possibility of Fed tightening as a risk to the forecast in our recent statements.
Surprises in forward guidance provided by the Fed, however, could have an impact.
There is therefore no automatic reaction on our part to global interest rate increases. We also
have to take cognisance of what is happening to other interest rates along the yield curve.
Capital flows are not only sensitive to short term yield differentials. In fact, the correlation
between South African and US long bond yields is much higher than at the shorter end. And
we should also bear in mind that the current “global interest rate cycle” is unsynchronised:
monetary policies in Japan, the Euro area and UK are still in accommodative mode, and there
is a general loosening bias in emerging markets.
With respect to how we position ourselves for a sovereign ratings downgrade, it is difficult to
give a simple answer, as there are so many scenarios that we can come up with. A ratings
downgrade is not a one-off discrete event, it is a continuing process. Two ratings agencies,
S&P Global Ratings and Fitch Ratings reported last week, and we await a report from Moody’s
Investors Service very soon. But that will not be the end and more reviews will follow later in
the year. The impact of a downgrade also depends on a number of factors: how many
agencies have downgraded us and which ones are they? Some are more important than
others for investor mandates and for inclusion in the various bond indices. How is domestic
currency denominated debt rated? Currently S&P and Moody’s still have domestic currency
denominated debt at investment grade.
9
A further fundamental question is who are the likely buyers of the bonds in the event of a
local bond selloff? If it is other non-residents, the impact on the exchange rate in particular
could be very different to a situation where the buyers are other non-residents who may be
attracted by the consequential high yields. We have seen, for example, that non-residents
have remained net buyers of South African government bonds in recent weeks and that bond
yields are largely unchanged compared to where they were at the time of the downgrade.
And finally, given that ratings announcements are generally not a big surprise, how much is
already priced into bond yields and the exchange rate?
Clearly there are quite a number of possible scenarios, with numerous combinations of
outcomes and timing which makes it very difficult to assess the ultimate impact. A worst-
case scenario would be one where all three agencies rate us as speculative or sub-investment
grade, including domestic currency denominated debt, which results in South African
government bonds falling out of the global bond indices. Such a scenario could entail large-
scale net bond sales by non-residents.
The fact that the response to the downgrade so far has been relatively benign probably has a
lot to do with the fact that we are still not in a worst-case scenario, and we still have a window
of opportunity to avoid this before the next round. Whether or not we will take that
opportunity remains to be seen. But we cannot assume that further downgrades will have the
same muted effect. Furthermore, the downgrades coincided with a more positive sentiment
towards emerging markets in general, which could have masked some of the adverse impact.
10
Work done at the Bank suggests that there are three main channels through which the
economy and monetary policy could be impacted. First would be the exchange rate channel,
and depends on the extent of the increase in the risk premium and the net sales of bonds by
non-residents. The second would be the impact on long bond yields in particular, but the
effect could be on the short end as well, should the depreciation impact on the inflation
outlook sufficiently to require a tightening of monetary policy. Ultimately, we believe the
most serious impact of the downgrade would be on private sector investment sentiment and
therefore on growth.
A scenario exercise conducted in the Bank assumed that local currency debt was downgraded
to sub-investment grade by all agencies, but in a favourable global environment. This is
assumed to result in a net bond outflow in excess of R100bn, and a permanent increase in the
country risk premium. The impact effect is an 11% depreciation of the rand, but it recovers
over time and by the end of 2019 it is 5% weaker than at the starting point. By 2019, compared
with the baseline, the GDP level is 1.1% lower (due to cumulative lower growth); potential
output is 1% lower; and CPI inflation is 0.6% higher. Private sector investment and household
consumption expenditure are 4% and 1% lower respectively. In terms of a monetary policy
response, the model suggests an immediate 50 basis point increase, and a cumulative 120
basis point increase compared with the baseline. I should stress this is a model-generated
scenario exercise only.
The bottom line, however, is that the uncertainty in this regard does cloud the outlook and
contributes to upside risk to the inflation outlook, and downside risk to growth. The outcome
is very uncertain, given the range of possible scenarios.
11
Moving away from the exchange rate, we are often asked why do we not reduce interest rates
to stimulate growth, given that the ratings agencies highlight our slow growth as a key risk.
We are of view that while monetary policy can impact on short term or cyclical growth, it has
limited impact on potential growth or the underlying structural growth in the economy. To
achieve a higher potential output would require structural reform initiatives that are beyond
the capabilities of the Bank. But we can impact cyclical growth, and we are very aware of this
in our policy decisions. This explains in part why the current interest rate cycle has been so
moderate compared with previous cycles.
The ratings agencies do not highlight monetary policy as one of the areas of concern. Nor do
they see a temporary stimulus as a solution to what they see as a structural growth problem.
To quote form the latest S&P release of last week when they maintained the current rating:
We consider South Africa’s monetary flexibility, and its track record in achieving price stability,
to be important credit strengths. …. The SARB is operationally independent, in our opinion,
with transparent and credible policies…. We expect that inflation will remain below 6% this
year and remain in the target range of 3%-6% over our three-year forecast horizon.
In conclusion, we are concerned about the impact of our policies on short term growth, but
we see price stability as the main contribution that we can make to longer-term growth. Our
assessment is that the current stance of monetary policy is not tight and is not a major
constraint to growth. As I mentioned earlier, for interest rates to be cut, we would like to see
the inflation forecast more comfortably within the target range over the forecast period. The
12
recent negative growth outcomes, and in particular the contraction in household
consumption expenditure, suggest a continued absence, and possibly weakening of demand
pressures, which may contribute to further inflation moderation. Further downside surprises
are also possible. But the risks that I have outlined still persist. Our policy reaction will remain
guided by how we see the inflation outlook going forward within the economic growth
context, but cognisant of the risks to the forecast. Ultimately it is a judgement call and, as
always, our decisions remain highly data dependent.
Thank you.
13