Titulo: Remarks by Fundi Tshazibana, Adviser to the Governors of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Nedbank 2019 Treasurer’s Conference, Summer place, Johannesburg, 12 June 2019
Data: 2019-06-12
Palestrante (estimado): Fundi Tshazibana
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2019/556
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2019/556/The-role-of-monetary-policy-settings-in-the-current-conjuncture.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Remarks by Fundi Tshazibana,
Adviser to the Governors of the South African Reserve Bank,
at the Nedbank 2019 Treasurer’s Conference
Summer place, Johannesburg
12 June 2019
The role of monetary policy settings in the current conjuncture
Introduction
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.
It is my pleasure to be addressing you today.
Since 2008, central banks have occupied a significant place in the global discourse
about economic growth. This is largely because, in the aftermath of the global financial
crisis, central banks acted decisively and in a coordinated manner to shore up liquidity
in financial markets, which provided space for countries to make appropriate policy
adjustments to boost actual and potential growth. It is therefore not surprising that, as
the global growth momentum is weakening, the debate about the role played by central
banks is gaining prominence. While the global discourse has straddled both financial
and price stability, in South Africa the focus has largely been on the role of monetary
policy in supporting growth.
My remarks this afternoon will be on South Africa’s monetary policy settings in the
current economic environment.
My message will be presented in three parts. First, I will briefly outline the delicate
economic conditions prevailing - both global and domestic. Second, I will highlight how
the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) is playing its part in supporting balanced and
Page 1 of 7
sustainable growth. Third, I will demonstrate why structural reforms and policy
certainty are essential to building the confidence required to increase investment and
enhance the resilience of the South African economy.
The conjuncture
Let me begin with a brief reflection on the conjuncture.
While the level of global growth is around the long-term average and global financial
conditions remain supportive, the momentum for global growth has slowed and
commodity prices are struggling to reach the levels recorded at the peak of the
commodity cycle. There are significant downside risks, the most prominent being the
escalation in trade tensions, which could undermine both global trade and investment,
with potential negative spillovers into market sentiment. Therefore, the risk of a
renewed tightening of financial conditions should not be underestimated. In this
regard, global conditions are likely to be less supportive of South Africa’s growth over
the medium term.
Domestic growth is showing signs of continuing sluggishness, as reflected in the most
recent gross domestic product (GDP) data and weak confidence indicators. The
SARB’s composite leading business cycle indicator has also trended downwards from
March 2018 up to March 2019, pointing to a renewed slowdown in output growth.
The contraction of 3.2% in the first quarter of 2019 is the lowest GDP outcome since
the global financial crisis. Even more concerning is the fact that the contraction was
broad-based.
In May, the SARB’s forecast was for growth to average 1% in 2019. This was based
on expectations of a smaller contraction in the first quarter. Given the actual outcome,
growth above 3% is now required in each of the remaining quarters of 2019 to achieve
the projected growth of 1%.
Overall, there remain significant downside risks to domestic growth. Weak business
confidence, possible electricity supply constraints and high debt levels in certain state-
owned enterprises (SOEs) will continue to limit investment prospects.
Page 2 of 7
Inflation outcomes and the role of monetary policy
Let me now turn to inflation outcomes and the role of monetary policy.
Since 2008, monetary policy has endeavoured to smooth output around potential, by
providing accommodation to a weak economy. This was achieved up to 2014, with a
repurchase rate at historically low levels. But as inflation gradually increased from
2011 to 2014 to about 6%, policy shifted somewhat to reduce accommodation, in an
effort to lessen the upward pressure of rising inflation on long-term interest rates, but
also to remain supportive of growth.
On balance, monetary policy has been accommodative, although the degree of
accommodation has declined over the past 10 months in particular. This decline in
accommodation, based on short-term real interest rates, has been caused by an
unexpected fall in consumer prices, mostly caused by two factors: a sharp decline in
the prices of imported goods due to rand appreciation early in 2018, and much lower
food prices than expected.
Imported goods prices were much lower than expected, and domestic meat prices
have fallen sharply. More recently, nominal compensation growth has also eased
alongside moderating rental prices. And as inflation has eased, the real interest rate
has risen, reducing notional accommodation. However, over the next three years, real
interest rates are expected to moderate.
Alongside less global inflationary pressure, these factors have fed into the SARB’s
forecasting of future inflation and, in the absence of any large shocks to inflation or a
sharp increase in risk, they have started to create more space for policy. Inflation itself
is rising moderately, but it is lower than had been forecast last year.
The SARB expects headline inflation to average 4.5% in 2019, increasing to 5.1% in
2020 and moderating to 4.6% in 2021. When we met in May, the Monetary Policy
Committee (MPC) found the risks to the inflation outlook to be more or less evenly
balanced. The MPC is encouraged by the moderation in inflation expectations. Over
Page 3 of 7
the next three years, the SARB’s model shows convergence towards the midpoint of
the inflation target range.
The South African Reserve Bank’s response to the current conjuncture
So how, then, should the SARB respond to the conjuncture?
Economic growth is in fact an explicit part of the policy equation in the SARB’s
quarterly projection model. It is a central feature of all policy discussions. I have come
across arguments that the SARB does not care about growth. I must say, I do not
recognise this image of the SARB in the policy processes that I see and participate in,
day to day.
The flexible inflation-targeting framework takes account of the outlook for the real
economy and how it will likely affect inflation over the three-year forecasting period.
For instance, when demand is weak and exerts downward pressure on prices, the
SARB has more latitude to look through supply shocks than in an environment of rapid
demand growth.
While the SARB recognises the role that monetary policy has to play in the economy,
this is in the context of smoothing output fluctuations over the business cycle. The
current challenges constraining South Africa’s economic growth are primarily
structural in nature. In this regard, to ensure that monetary policy settings have a
sustained positive impact on growth, monetary policy should be appropriately
supported by other macroeconomic policies. The longer-term costs of higher inflation
and a deterioration in inflation expectations have potentially adverse impacts on policy
credibility, consumer purchasing power, borrowing costs, and the global
competitiveness of South African firms.
Indeed, there is a conversation to be had about why South African prices and inflation
remain elevated relative to our trading partners. The SARB’s assessment is that this
is due to pricing practices, market structure, and other supply-side rigidities. Reducing
the cost structure of the economy requires the implementation of credible structural
policy initiatives.
Page 4 of 7
The role of structural reforms
Allow me to reflect on why structural reforms matter more now than they perhaps did
before.
The key constraint for macroeconomic policymakers has been, and remains, a very
low potential growth rate. Estimates of potential growth have decreased from over 4%
prior to the global financial crisis to just over 1% today.
This low growth potential has been caused by a series of shocks, including an
insufficient electricity supply and rising electricity costs, protracted strikes and weak
investment in the mining and manufacturing sectors, severe drought, and very low
business confidence as a result of policy uncertainty. This, in turn, has translated into
lower levels of private investment generally, while public investment has slowed due
to the crowding out of capital budgets by strong growth in public employment costs,
wasteful procurement practices, and management failures at SOEs.
Low growth potential is a serious problem for policy. It means that, in a vicious cycle,
macroeconomic stimulus will inevitably cause higher inflation, more currency
depreciation and higher interest rates rather than growth in investment, employment
and output. In this regard, monetary policy space needs to be created by reforms that
raise potential growth through the improved use of capital, labour and higher
productivity. The same goes for fiscal policy. This is important for efforts to initiate
stronger growth, and implies that microeconomic reforms need to be staged first.
Getting the sequencing right will ease the constraint on the macroeconomic policy
levers and will enable them to be used judiciously to support economic growth when
the business cycle weakens.
Investment by firms, households and government may not be the largest component
of demand, but it is the most important factor for GDP growth. In the short run,
investment creates demand for goods and services as firms buy materials and
services to create new productive capacity. In the medium term, the new capacity is
used to produce more goods and services.
Page 5 of 7
Investment appetites are strongly influenced by what government chooses and how
fast the choices are implemented. The willingness of firms to invest also depends on
their expectations of future economic activity, the opportunities available, the cost of
investing, as well as whether they believe that their property rights are protected.
These also contribute to firms’ hiring decisions.
It should also be recognised that investment will not be sustainable if more South
Africans do not benefit from stronger economic growth. To get this right, investment
needs to generate many more jobs, even as others are lost due to productivity gains
and more competition.
Structural reforms are critical to that effort, because they increase competition to
incumbent firms, providing new opportunities, and remove impediments to South
Africans of all skill levels to take advantage of opportunities to work. We need to
develop mechanisms to retrain, develop skills, and facilitate the rapid re-entry of
workers at all skill levels back into the growing sectors.
While various commitments of investment have been made over the last year, poor
GDP outcomes and weak confidence point to a trust deficit that continues to hinder
growth.1 Rebuilding trust in all the aspects of economic policy requires rapid delivery
on a well-designed policy agenda.
There is no shortage of reform ideas, although understanding and assessing their
effects on the economy is a complicated task. And so while we do not need to reinvent
the wheel, we do still need to prioritise where to apply effort, on what timescale, and
in what order or sequence.
Conclusion
To conclude, let me reiterate that the current global economic conditions are clouded
with risks and that the current domestic economic conditions are delicate. We need to
get domestic growth going again.
1 Algan and Cahuc (2010) establish a positive relationship between the level of economic activity and
trust. Higher trust levels are associated with stronger and more sustainable growth.
Page 6 of 7
To ensure that this growth is sustainable, balanced and shared, policy choices must
carefully balance short-term gains and costs against long-term gains and costs.
In an environment of limited resources and constrained policy space, I would advocate
that policy certainty is the cheapest form of stimulus for this economy. In this context,
understanding and clearly communicating the role of various institutions and policy
instruments is important.
As mentioned earlier, the primary contribution of monetary policy to growth is its ability
to smooth output fluctuations over the business cycle. However, where structural
constraints are prominent, monetary policy effectiveness is impeded. In the interest of
contributing to policy certainty, the SARB has strengthened its monetary policy
communication and transparency. Indeed, the views I am conveying to you today are
captured in various MPC statements.
The SARB discharges its duties in the public interest. This is a fine balancing act. It is
the SARB’s assessment that macroeconomic stability is that which gives comfort to
investors to make investments that enable growth and employment in our economy.
Equally, preserving the purchasing power of households, and having stable costs of
borrowing, is important to achieving real income growth for households. These factors
are essential for economic development, but not possible in an environment of high
inflation.
The conjuncture calls for decisive and appropriate policy action. The SARB remains
committed to playing its part in building confidence and enhancing the resilience of the
economy.
Thank you.
Page 7 of 7