Titulo: Address by Ms Fundi Tshazibana, Deputy Governor for the South African Reserve Bank, at the Nelson Mandela Bay 2021 Leadership Summit
Data: 2021-07-28
Palestrante (estimado): Fundi Tshazibana
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2021/Address-by-Ms-Fundi-Tshazibana-SARB-DG-at-the-Nelson-Mandela-Bay-2021-Leadership-Summit
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2021/dg-fundi/Address%20by%20Ms%20Fundi%20Tshazibana,%20Deputy%20Governor%20for%20the%20South%20African%20Reserve%20Bank,%20at%20the%20Nelson%20Mandela%20Bay%202021%20Leadership%20Summit.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Central banking, fast and slow1
Address by Ms Fundi Tshazibana, Deputy Governor for the South African
Reserve Bank, at the Nelson Mandela Bay 2021 Leadership Summit, 28 July
2021.
‘Leadership skills to inform the great reset of society: from global grief to
hope’
Good afternoon and thank you for the invitation to speak at your Leadership Summit.
As a relatively new central banker, I have been fascinated by how central banks
function – the magnitude of the decisions they make and the most important elements
of their work often go unnoticed by many of us, because these things are simply what
ought to be. We don’t think when we go to the ATM to draw cash − the banknotes are
there. When we take out our cards to make payments and when we make EFT
payments, we don’t stop to think about the payments process, unless of course, there
are system glitches. We don’t think about how government is able to borrow money in
financial markets every week – it just does. In the middle of various economic crises,
we haven’t lost sleep over many of these things that seem to just happen.
At the same time, there are many other things we are losing sleep over as South
Africans. For instance, we have had over 200 0002 excess deaths over the past year
1 The title borrows from Daniel Kahneman’s well-known book, Thinking, fast and slow. On 6 July 2020,
Project Syndicate published an op-ed by Mohammed El-Erian also titled ‘Central banking, fast and
slow’. The title of this speech was finalised in June and published in the Nelson Mandela Bay
Leadership Summit programme before this article appeared. This speech deals with a different subject
matter to the op-ed and the shared title is purely coincidental.
2 The South African Medical Research Council estimates around 203 000 excess deaths recorded
since 3 May 2020. https://www.samrc.ac.za/reports/report-weekly-deaths-south-africa
1
and a half, mostly due to COVID-19. We have a youth unemployment rate of 46.3%,3
the largest public sector debt burden in our history; uncertainty about the reopening of
many businesses in the hospitality, travel and tourism sectors; and the high likelihood
that many people and many small firms will be left behind as we move into the digital
age. These are areas where there are huge gaps between what is happening, and
what ought to be.
As leaders, our task is to help close these gaps. Yes, the starting point we have in our
country is very difficult. Still, the South African problem is not only that we have a
difficult history. It is that we keep on producing more of it. Our challenge as leaders is
to change this pattern, not only by developing plans, but by implementing them and
taking decisions to correct our course along the way.
I hope my address will give you some ideas for making better decisions, based on my
experience at the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) and the broad economics
literature.
Leading people, and why it’s harder than rocket science
Economics is sometimes portrayed as a profession obsessed with money, but that
description is perhaps better reserved for accounting. In truth, economics is a subject
fascinated by decision-making. This is because the subject matter of economics is
human beings and their choices, which makes it difficult because human choices defy
simple rules.
Ben Bernanke, a former Governor of the United States Federal Reserve, once made
this point using the example of rocket science. In the 1960s, he tells us, there were
many economists who tried to adapt the complicated mathematics of rocket science
to economics. They ultimately hoped to steer economies just as rocket scientists could
steer spaceships and missiles. But it didn’t work. As Bernanke explains:
3 As of the first quarter of 2021, according to Statistics South Africa’s Quarterly Labour Force Survey.
http://www.statssa.gov.za/publications/P0211/Media%20release%20QLFS%20Q1%202021.pdf
2
Unfortunately, macroeconomic policy turned out not to be rocket science! The
problem lay in a crucial difference between a missile and an economy – which
is that, unlike the people who make up an economy, the components of a
missile do not try to understand and anticipate the forces being applied to
them.4
For central banking in particular, this insight helped lay the ground for inflation
targeting. It showed policymakers that there wouldn’t be stable relationships between
things like unemployment and inflation. If central banks thought they could get more
jobs by tolerating more inflation, people would learn to expect higher inflation.
Then inflation would rise, without unemployment falling. This is how the world got to
the stagflation of the 1970s, where the 1960s trade-off between inflation and
unemployment broke down, and both were high simultaneously.
This experience showed that central banks needed a different theory. The new
paradigm, inflation targeting, focused instead on communication and credibility.
Central banks started communicating clear targets, and doing what it took to achieve
them. As people came to understand and trust in these targets, their expectations
shifted, which changed outcomes.
Clear and credible communication turned out to be a secret weapon.
Decision-making theory in behavioural economics
These kinds of insights led to an approach called ‘rational choice’ becoming prominent
in economics, with decisions being explained as products of rational, forward-looking
agents pursuing self-interest. This was a useful simplification, especially for all the
researchers whose models worked better with these shortcuts. But of course, as you
and I know from personal experience, human beings are not rational actors.
4 Ben S Bernanke, ‘A perspective on inflation targeting’, 25 March 2003.
https://www.bis.org/review/r030325d.pdf
3
It took a psychologist, Daniel Kahneman, to move the field forward. Kahneman – who
won the Nobel Memorial Prize for Economics in 2002 – pioneered a field called
‘behavioural economics’, which aimed to marry the rigour of the rational choice model
with greater realism. My title for this speech, ‘Central banking, fast and slow’, is drawn
from his famous book, Thinking, fast and slow.
To give context to the title, the book talks about two modes of thought: System 1
thinking, which is fast, instinctive, and emotional; and System 2 thinking, which is
slower, more deliberate, and logical. This book, and the larger field of behavioural
economics, is fundamentally about human decision-making and where it goes wrong.
I’ll sketch out some of the key ideas from this literature, and then discuss how they
manifest in my area of work.
For Kahneman, humans make two kinds of judgement errors: bias and noise. People
use decision-making shortcuts, often unconsciously, which cause them to make
mistakes in specific directions. This is bias. And then their judgements are surprisingly
erratic, which is noise.
A good example of bias is the fear of flying. Plane crashes are rare but when they
happen, they are newsworthy. On the other hand, car crashes are very common, but
they get much less attention. Unfortunately, we are biased towards treating visible and
dramatic information as being more important. As for noise, even where there is no
bias, there is still a surprising amount of randomness in human decisions.
In their latest book,5 Kahnemann and his co-authors discuss large disparities in
criminal sentences for basically similar cases, with some defendants getting one-year
sentences and others 15 years for the same offence. They also document similar
noisiness in the medical profession. Radiographers, for example, will come up with
different diagnoses even when looking at the same X-rays.
5 Daniel Kahneman, Olivier Sibony and Cass Sunstein, Noise, New York: Little, Brown Spark, 2021.
4
The point is not that judges and medical professionals are especially untrustworthy.
Rather, it is that human decisions are surprisingly random, even for experts and even
for something quite objective such as an X-ray.
Before I joined the central bank, I used to make jokes about central banks and their
committees. I now have an appreciation of why they matter as decision-making
structures. Most real-world decision-making features high levels of uncertainty and
significant risk of error. This means that we must have mechanisms to bring together
different perspectives and that we must rigorously interrogate evidence to minimise
our personal bias and noise so that decisions can be justified. This is relevant for both
public policymakers and private sector leaders.
Central banking – slow thinking, not short-term thinking
When I first started exploring the work on fast and slow thinking, I of course started
with its relevance for public policy. Central banking should be a classic case of slow,
deliberative thinking, with a medium-term view and logical, evidence-based analysis.
When we change interest rates today, it has effects about 12 to 24 months ahead. But
very often the debate about monetary policy is absorbed by short-term thinking,
focused on last month’s data.
For instance, in May this year we received an inflation print of 5.2%, which is above
the 4.5% midpoint of our inflation target. The SARB had been projecting a spike in
inflation for over a year, and had published its forecast for inflation and implications for
the interest rate path, so the May inflation print was basically no surprise to us at the
SARB.
Nonetheless, this concrete and visible data point seemed to make people think that
the SARB would now be more likely to hike interest rates. Similarly, in June, when
inflation slowed to 4.9%, this was welcomed as good news for interest rates. But again,
we had expected this. At most, it confirmed our forecast.
These were classic examples of the so-called ‘availability heuristic’, where something
easy to see obscures the facts which actually matter for a decision.
5
This past year, the focus on short-term issues contributed to criticism of the SARB as
not doing the right thing. Yet, when we look at historical performance, the SARB,
imperfect as it might be, has kept to its price stability mandate and brought down
inflation rates to well within the target range. The cost of borrowing is therefore lower
because lenders don’t have to demand so much inflation compensation. SARB
decisions have also become more transparent – at every meeting of the MPC we
publish our forecasts and give reasons for our decisions.
Fairly low and stable inflation is now something we can take for granted as South
Africans, and high inflation is perceived as something that happens to other people far
away. But if the SARB hadn’t patiently worked on stabilising inflation and building
credibility, we could easily have been one of those high inflation countries. Then high
inflation would have been high up the list of problems I mentioned earlier, worrying us
all and keeping us awake. And the SARB certainly wouldn’t have been able to move
fast when the COVID-19 crisis hit, and cut interest rates to record lows.
The SARB has demonstrated with its policy response to the COVID-19 crisis that ‘slow
thinking’ does not mean slow responses, and it certainly does not mean not taking
decisions. Actually, slow, more deliberate, logical and long-term thinking is essential
for building buffers that support rapid responses during a crisis. And for public
institutions to adapt to the evolving needs of the economy.
To minimise our individual biases and noise, at the SARB we have committee-based
decision meetings. This is where we sit down, study the data and consult models that
give us policy advice. Then we argue with each other, often quite energetically. Maybe
you think real experts don’t disagree and don’t need computer models to help make
decisions, but given the high levels of uncertainty and significant risks of error in
decision-making, it is crucial to have the confidence to test your decisions properly.
You are a better leader if you accept that decision-making is hard and that gut instinct
is unreliable.
Conclusion
6
In offering this brief sketch of decision-making, and how economists have studied it
over the years, let me conclude with a couple of takeaways that I hope will stay with
you and inform your own thinking and leadership.
The first lesson is that leadership is about people. People learn; they adapt their
behaviour to incentives and their expectations of the future. Central bankers and many
other economists have spent too much time trying to fit people into physics-like models
with unchanging laws and behaviours. We have done much better since we came to
rely instead on communication and credibility as key mechanisms for achieving our
goals.
A second lesson is that once longer-term objectives have been set, we should have
the discipline to stick to them. This does not mean that we ignore where we are –
starting points do matter. But there is a big difference between course correction and
changing strategy.
As a country, we need to make decisions and take deliberate actions that will move
us steadily in the direction that we set out in our long-term strategy, the National
Development Plan (NDP). The NDP vision for the country includes, among other
things, an inclusive economy with high employment, a low cost of living, a lower cost
of doing business and better education outcomes. There are no shortcuts here. As the
saying goes, ‘The best time to plant a tree was 20 years ago. The second best time is
now.’ We all wish better decisions had been made historically, but the question for
leaders is, what good decisions are you making now?
The third lesson is that the lived experience of being a leader is confusing, loud and
uncertain. We all cope as best we can, but some coping strategies make things worse.
As leaders, we therefore need to work hard to manage our biases and our knee-jerk
reactions. Thus, it is vital to have sound mechanisms that bring together different
perspectives, that minimise bias and noise in decision-making, and which end with a
clear decision.
7
As leaders we must have humility and accept that finding answers is not easy. We
must design the best process we can to get to good decisions, and then have the
courage to commit and deliver.
The fourth lesson is that, as we contemplate the scale of our challenges as institutions,
as businesses, as a country, we must remember that we can’t do it all and we will fail
if we try. One of the things the behaviouralists got right was to recognise that
complexity can be overwhelming, and that real-world decision-making requires coping
mechanisms. From the perspective of a country, one of the ways you do this is by
having institutions that accumulate expertise and specialise in making specific
decisions. Then you let them do their jobs.
At the SARB, we have been given mandates to protect price and financial stability.
Those are clear missions, assigned to us by a democratic, constitutional order, and
we have focused on them. We have avoided interfering in other areas where we don’t
have expertise and where we could put our main goals at risk. This focus has helped
us deliver substantial benefits for South Africa.
The broader lesson is that we can’t fix everything; it’s just too much. We have to divide
up the work, and then we have to each focus on the things we can do best. It may be
unsatisfying to see problems you aren’t tackling, but there is plenty of important work
to go around.
I hope these ideas will be useful to you.
Thank you.
8