Titulo: An address by Lesetja Kganyago, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB), at the 101st annual Ordinary General Meeting of the shareholders
Data: 2021-07-30
Palestrante (estimado): Lesetja Kganyago
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/governor's-address-to-shareholders/2021/an-address-by-lesetja-kganyago--governor-of-the-south-african-re
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/governor%27s-address-to-shareholders/2021/Governor%27s%20Address%20at%20the%202021%20AGM.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

An address by Lesetja Kganyago,
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB),
at the 101st annual Ordinary General Meeting of the shareholders
South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria
30 July 2021
Introduction
We convene our 101st annual Ordinary General Meeting (AGM) more than 18 months
since the first COVID-19 case was reported in South Africa, and as the third wave of
virus infections has peaked. Restrictive measures have been necessary to protect
human lives, with negative effects across our economy, leaving deep scars on
businesses and on the economic livelihoods of many South Africans.
While the magnitude of the economic shock has been difficult to estimate, the South
African Reserve Bank (SARB) responded quickly and aggressively with a broad array
of actions to limit the economic damage, in line with its constitutional and legislative
mandates. The policy responses included the use of monetary policy, market
operations to support the functioning of financial markets, regulatory tools, as well as
collaborations with other entities to provide relief to the economy and support lending
to households and firms. In addition, the SARB has been contributing in global forums
aimed at fostering greater international cooperation to strengthen the global financial
safety net.
Monetary policy was adjusted rapidly, with the SARB’s Monetary Policy Committee
(MPC) cutting the repurchase (repo) rate to an all-time low of 3.5%, leaving the prime
Page - 1 - of 9
rate at a 54-year low of 7.0%. These low rates have supported household demand for
credit and have cushioned corporates through low short-term rates while allowing
government to take advantage of cheaper short-term debt.
Liquidity management also shifted quickly to address funding strains in the domestic
financial markets through the utilisation of the repo facility at various maturities. The
intraday repo facility offered R36 billion daily, while the weekly and three-month
funding windows made R45 billion and R20 billion available respectively. To add
liquidity and promote the continued smooth functioning of the bond market, the SARB
implemented a bond-buying programme in the secondary market. The value of
government bonds purchased totalled R41 billion. As a result of these actions, liquidity
conditions in the money market and the government bond market normalised quickly,
and market functioning was restored.
The Prudential Authority (PA) granted temporary regulatory and supervisory relief
measures to enable banks to continue lending and supporting their customers. The
relief measures were provided in three areas, namely: lowering the liquidity coverage
ratio from 100% to 80%, lowering the minimum capital requirements, and relaxing the
provisioning requirements in order to permit the restructuring of distressed loans. The
PA also issued guidance to banks discouraging dividend payments and executive
bonuses in 2020. This measure has since been reversed.
Finally, the SARB partnered with National Treasury and the Banking Association
South Africa (BASA) to establish the Government Loan Guarantee Scheme. As at
19 June 2021, R18.39 billion in loans had already been approved by banks and taken
up by small businesses under the scheme.
There has been criticism surrounding the low uptake of the loan guarantees. It is
important to note that the Loan Guarantee Scheme was a backstop for cases where
the commercial banking sector was unable to provide credit relief to borrowers due to
high credit risk. In practice, banks responded quickly and very successfully, acting
swiftly to support the firms to which they lend.
Page - 2 - of 9
In addition, small and medium businesses appear to have been reluctant to take up
more debt, especially in an environment characterised by deteriorating confidence, a
sluggish recovery and heightened economic uncertainty.
Let me now turn to a reflection on recent economic developments.
Global conditions
On the global front, economic recovery is on track but uneven. The International
Monetary Fund’s (IMF) July World Economic Outlook projects a stronger recovery in
both 2021 and 2022, with growth projected at 6.0% and 4.9% respectively.
The advanced economies, led by the United States (US), look set to reach pre-COVID-
19 levels much sooner than their emerging and developing economy counterparts.
The US continues to pursue unprecedented fiscal expansion and an accommodative
monetary stance. Most recently, the European Commission passed its
NextGenerationEU stimulus package, in conjunction with its Multiannual Financial
Framework 2021–2027. These significant policy responses will see a fiscal injection
of €2.018 trillion in European Union (EU) member states over the coming years.
Economies in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) continue to lag their peers. Coming into the
pandemic, most of these economies were already battling with a lack of policy space
and sluggish implementation of reforms necessary to boost growth. Slow vaccination
rates will continue to weigh on economic recovery in this region, even after the lifting
of hard lockdowns. Many economies in the SSA region continue to struggle with high
debt levels and conflicting policy priorities, including the need for higher health
spending, the strengthening of social safety nets, improved fiscal positions and kick-
starting much-needed infrastructure projects. Against this backdrop, the regional
economy contracted by an estimated 1.9% in 2020. The IMF forecasts growth of 3.4%
in 2021 and 4.1% in 2022 for SSA.
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused large demand and supply shocks globally. The
policy space to respond has been varied across countries, depending on pre-
pandemic economic conditions as well as the risk perceptions of funders and
Page - 3 - of 9
investors. These demand-related challenges were the short-term difficulties. The
longer-term challenges are harder to address as they concern supply.
The pandemic has disrupted global and domestic value chains, and has destroyed
businesses and jobs. It will take time to rebuild our economies to pre-pandemic levels.
Supply constraints also contribute to higher inflation, so as we recover from the
pandemic, this raises the prospect that, over the medium term, monetary policy may
need to retreat from its highly accommodative stance. Much of the financial market
volatility we have seen in recent months reflects how markets assess these monetary
policy dynamics, including how monetary policy may be constrained by negative
supply shocks and impacted by the ongoing expansionary fiscal efforts.
The US Federal Reserve has indicated that the higher inflation outcomes of recent
months are primarily transitory and are therefore not expected to result in permanently
higher inflation. Nonetheless, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has
shifted its position, perhaps signalling a somewhat earlier normalisation of monetary
policy than was foreseen last year.
The European Central Bank (ECB) has finalised a revision of its strategic framework,
setting a clear inflation target of 2% and thus moving away from the previous
articulation of ‘below but close to 2%’. This has clarified the target and removed
uncertainty about potential policy responses if inflation were forecast to rise above 2%.
Domestic conditions
Since the last AGM, we have seen the domestic economy recover faster than
expected, although output remains 3.3% below real 2019 levels. The first-quarter
gross domestic product (GDP) figure of 4.6% quarter on quarter (the seasonally
adjusted annual rate (saar)) surprised on the upside. However, the recovery remains
uneven, and is largely driven by strong performance in the finance and mining sectors.
Mining has been benefitting from rising commodity prices, and manufacturing appears
to be benefitting from improving global and domestic demand. Finance and trade, also
linked to improving demand, appear to be closing in on the 2019 level, in step with
manufacturing, while agriculture has benefitted from high rainfall and bumper harvests
Page - 4 - of 9
in 2020. However, construction and tourism-related activities remain well below their
2019 levels. Transport, impacted by reduced travel (for both commute and leisure),
also remains well below the 2019 level.
The recent unrest and economic damage could, however, fully negate these better
growth results, and could have lasting effects on investor confidence. As a result, our
GDP growth forecast for 2021 remains at 4.2% for now. Prior to the unrest of recent
weeks, the soft economic indicators were pointing to a more positive outlook.
The business confidence index measured by the Bureau for Economic Research
(BER) rose to the 50-point neutral level for the second quarter of 2021 – for the first
time in seven years. The Absa Purchasing Managers’ Index and the SACCI trade
expectations index remained in expansionary territory.
Consumer confidence, however, softened in response to uncertainty about the
economic outlook and income arising from renewed COVID-19 infection rates and the
slow vaccine roll-out. The recent events, electricity load-shedding and lockdowns will
continue to weaken near-term sentiment in the economy and pose risks to growth.
The official unemployment rate edged up marginally in the first quarter of 2021, from
36.5% to 36.6%, as more people re-enter the labour market but job growth remains
lacklustre.
Headline inflation accelerated from 4.4% in April to 5.2% in May, largely on petrol, food
and base effects, before easing slightly to 4.9% in June. Core inflation remained
subdued at 3.1% over this period. Risks to the inflation outlook emanate mainly from
global factors such as higher food and oil prices, as well as global supply disruptions
pushing up producer prices. However, a stronger exchange rate, economic slack and
modest housing-led service price inflation continue to moderate inflation outcomes.
Additionally, higher domestic crop production should help mitigate food inflation
pressures.
Let me now turn to some factors that have impacted our financial system.
Page - 5 - of 9
The financial stability mandate
The COVID-19 pandemic found our financial sector resilient due to continued
enhancement to our regulatory and supervisory frameworks. The regulatory capital
ratios for both the banking and the insurance sectors remained at roughly the same
levels at the end of 2020 as they were before the onset of COVID-19. This is attributed
to a moderate level of credit extension keeping profitability in the banking and
insurance sectors positive, and capital retained by measures that reduced dividend
payouts.
Asset prices have rebounded in line with economic activity, and the rate of loan
defaults continues to stabilise. The JSE Limited (JSE) All-Share Index (Alsi) has fully
recovered the losses suffered in 2020. House price growth has also improved in recent
months, achieving positive real growth for the first time since 2016. While the banking
sector’s loan defaults may not have peaked yet, the pace of increase slowed
significantly in late 2020 amid signs that borrower debt-service capacity was
improving. The value of credit restructured as a result of COVID-19 has more than
halved from its peak in mid-2020.
Nonetheless, material risks to financial stability still exist, and we continue to monitor
them. They relate to the durability of the economic recovery, the high and rising level
of public debt in South Africa, and the potential for global financial conditions to shift
abruptly.
Operational matters
The work that we have to do as a central bank also includes ensuring that our national
payment system remains robust and that we keep up with changes brought about by
advancements in financial technology (fintech) that result in new payment methods.
During the reporting period, the SARB’s National Payment System Department
launched the real-time gross settlement (RTGS) system renewal programme. The
RTGS system enables payments by members of the public, merchants and corporates
as well as government entities through accounts held by their banks at the SARB. With
Page - 6 - of 9
the renewal programme, the SARB aims to widen access to payment services,
enhance competition through the leveraging of technology developments, reduce the
cost of the system, lower the transaction fees, and make the system more flexible and
adaptable to relevant changes in the financial sector.
Earlier this year, the Intergovernmental Fintech Working Group published a position
paper on crypto-assets. The paper provides a road map for putting in place a
framework for regulating crypto-assets in South Africa, through the regulation of
crypto-asset service providers. The paper makes 25 recommendations related to
cross-border financial flows, consumer protection and market abuse, as well as
containing money-laundering and combating the financing of terrorism.
The second phase of Project Khokha, through which the SARB practically explores
the potential impact of distributed ledger technology on financial markets, is also
nearing its final stages. The final report will be published by the end of
September 2021.
As we look to the future, the SARB, like many other central banks, has embarked on
a central bank digital currency (CBDC) feasibility study. The objective of the study is
to investigate if it would be feasible, appropriate and desirable for the SARB to issue
a CBDC to be used for retail purposes, complementary to cash, in South Africa.
Our centenary
Although this is the 101st AGM, this year marks 100 years of the SARB’s existence.
Over the past century, we have steered through the devastating impact of the Great
Depression, the deadliest war in history (World War II), institutionalised racial
segregation, the oil crisis of the 1970s, the dawn of democracy in South Africa, the
global financial crisis, threats to the SARB’s independence and, today, the COVID-19
pandemic – the worst virus outbreak since the Spanish flu in 1918.
Page - 7 - of 9
This year, we also celebrate the rand’s 60th birthday, 25 years of central bank
independence following the adoption of South Africa’s Constitution in 1996, and
21 years of inflation-targeting.
In celebration of its centenary, the SARB has launched a commemorative
R5 circulation coin. The coin illustrates the journey of the currency minted by the SARB
from the iconic ‘tickey’ to a glimpse of the future 10c coin.
We also held a virtual ceremony, shared with our stakeholders, former Governors and,
importantly, our staff. We were honoured to host the leadership of yesteryear,
including Dr Chris Stals, Minister Tito Mboweni and Ms Gill Marcus. There were also
messages from BASA, the IMF and the Bank for International Settlements (BIS). The
messages reflected a deep respect and admiration for the institutional strength of the
SARB.
In October this year, the SARB, together with the BIS, will be hosting a virtual Biennial
Conference, themed ‘Policy challenges after the pandemic’. The conference will
explore some of the main challenges that central banks and macroeconomic
policymakers are facing in the wake of COVID-19.
Conclusion
In closing, I have to express my gratitude to, and would like to commend, the hard-
working staff of the SARB. When we convened last year, I outlined measures to
transition our staff to working from home. I am happy to report that, while most of our
staff members continue working from home, they are well-equipped and have been
able to continue executing their respective tasks fully. We are working with the health
authorities to allow for SARB staff to be vaccinated across the country.
The impact of COVID-19 on our health system, on our society and on our economy
has been enormous, drawing parallels to the Spanish flu of 1918. The institutional
framework through which the SARB exercises its functions has enabled us to respond
to the economic impact of the crisis with scale and with speed, while balancing short-
term and longer-term trade-offs.
Page - 8 - of 9
To rebuild our economy, jobs need to be created. Businesses must be restarted and
new ones must be established to align with the changing economic needs. Investment
decisions need to be taken. Our national policy frameworks must facilitate and enable
those basic economic decisions, consistently and sustainably, providing cost-effective
and reliable network services, education, and many other quality public services.
As we navigate through this current storm, a multi-pronged policy approach
is required, with all institutions of government responding in line with their defined
roles. The SARB will continue to play its part and deploy its tools, as appropriate,
in accordance with its mandate, to continue providing support to the South African
economy and building buffers to enable us to navigate any new storms that may come.
As we look to the next 100 years, we remain committed to anchoring our work in a
strategy that takes account of the fast-changing economic environment.
This is a time to rebuild; this is a time to repair – making our economy fairer, more
dynamic, and inclusive of all South Africans.
Thank you.
Page - 9 - of 9