Titulo: Keynote address by Deputy Governor Rashad Cassim at the 2024 Market Practitioners Group Conference
Data: 2024-08-21
Palestrante (estimado): Deputy Governor Rashad Cassim
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2024/keynote-address-by-deputy-governor-rashaad-cassim-at-the-2024-ma
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2024/Keynote%20address%20by%20Deputy%20Governor%20Rashad%20Cassim%20at%20the%202024%20MPG%20Conference.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Opening remarks by Dr Rashad Cassim,
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,
at the Market Practitioners Group Conference,
The Maslow, Sandton, Johannesburg,
21 August 2024
The upcoming Jibar transition
Good morning, all.
We appreciate that, of all the priorities competing for your time, you have chosen to
attend this third Market Practitioners Group (MPG) Conference. Our subject is an
important one: the upcoming transition of the Johannesburg Interbank Average Rate,
commonly known as Jibar, to ZARONIA which is the South African Rand Overnight
Index Average rate.
For several years, the MPG and the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) have been
building the foundations for reference rate reform.
The designated successor to Jibar, ZARONIA is an overnight, wholesale deposit rate.
It is near risk-free, and unlike Jibar, it is based on large volumes of actual transactions
in the South African market, as opposed to a rate based on small volumes of quotes.
The veracity of ZARONIA has been tested extensively through a year-long observation
period, which concluded in November 2023. It is now being published daily on the
South Arican Reserve Bank (SARB) website for use in financial contracts.
Many of you may be aware that the MPG has published several white papers
recommending market conventions for ZARONIA-based cash and derivatives
products. Based on these developments, market infrastructure providers have
implemented solutions to support market activity.
Page 1 of 5
Before I open to our panels of experts, I want to make three general points. Then, I
will move on to highlight some operational and methodological challenges associated
with the transition process.
First, the SARB remains committed to discontinuing Jibar.
Second, it is important for market participants to prioritise an active transition away
from Jibar based contracts and not just adopt a wait-and-see approach. The best way
to minimise transition risks is to minimise the stock of legacy contracts based on Jibar.
Third, the most progressive way forward for market participants will be to take
ownership of the transition, to establish transition programmes within your
organisations and, to work out your own paths forward.
Jibar cessation
The latest results from the Jibar-related exposures survey indicate that the number of
financial contracts referencing Jibar remains huge, with the total gross exposure
estimated at over R57 trillion. Much of this exposure is attributable to derivatives
contracts that reference the three-month Jibar, accounting for about 91%, while at the
same time, the volume of three-month negotiable certificates of deposit (NCDs) that
underpins the three-month Jibar remains very small, at just R10 billion. We clearly
need a better benchmark, and that is why we are committed to the Jibar cessation.
That said, the SARB’s commitment to discontinuing Jibar should not be taken to mean
that Jibar is non-representative. It is not the SARB’s intention to trigger any pre-
cessation clauses at this stage, but rather to give the market the confidence it needs
to engage with the transition effort in earnest.
The MPG’s recent ‘Update on the Jibar transition plan’ indicates that Jibar will cease
towards the end of 2026.1 The SARB intends to announce the precise Jibar cessation
date in December 2025.
This leaves the market with just over two years to complete the Jibar transition. It is
an ambitious timeline, but achievable.
Managing legacy contracts
1 Market Practitioners Group, Transition Planning and Coordination Workstream, ‘Update on the Jibar
transition plan’, 2024. https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/financial-
markets/committees/mpg/mpg-ralated-documents/2024/update-on-the-Jibar-transition-plan.pdf
(accessed 10 August 2024).
Page 2 of 5
Jibar and ZARONIA are structurally different. There are term and risk premia in Jibar
that do not apply to an overnight cash rate like ZARONIA. Therefore, we will need
quantitative techniques to achieve economic equivalence when switching from Jibar
to ZARONIA. This will largely be achieved by adding an adjustment spread to
ZARONIA.
You may ask: How can we determine an appropriate adjustment spread? It is not a
straightforward question to answer. We could employ quantitative models to identify
the various premiums in Jibar, and then base the adjustment factor on these spreads.
However, model results can be sensitive to assumptions, and the models themselves
may not be widely understood, which could make it difficult to achieve consensus on
what the appropriate adjustment spread should be.
Alternatively, we could rely solely on observed data to compute the adjustment spread.
This would require choosing an approach − for instance, the historical mean or
median, the spot spread, or a forward-looking approach. This would then inform the
choice of the ZARONIA measure that will be used – that is, whether the adjustment
spread incorporates compounded ZARONIA period averages, spot ZARONIA rates,
or forward-looking ZARONIA rates that incorporate market expectations. Clearly, the
choice of the Jibar measure would need to align with the choice of the ZARONIA
measure.
Fortunately, the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (ISDA) has consulted
widely on this issue,2 and concluded that market participants would prefer the historical
median approach, with an adjustment spread based on five years of data.3 This
method would be robust against data outliers resulting from unusual market
conditions, as well as potential manipulation.4 Consequently, this method was adopted
in cash and derivatives markets in the United States, United Kingdom and many
jurisdictions that were impacted by the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR)
transition.
Nonetheless, in South Africa, market participants are not only concerned about dealing
with data outliers; they are also concerned about structural shifts in the behaviour of
the Jibar, especially since the SARB’s migration to a surplus system for implementing
monetary policy in June 2022. It appears that this reform has squeezed liquidity
premiums, in that the spread between ZARONIA and Jibar has narrowed somewhat.
2 ISDA, ‘Consultation on certain aspects of fallbacks for derivatives referencing GBP LIBOR, CHF
LIBOR, JPY LIBOR, TIBOR, Euroyen TIBOR and BBSW’, 2018.
https://assets.isda.org/media/f253b540-193/42c13663-pdf/ (accessed 10 August 2024).
3 The Brattle Group, ‘Summary of responses to the ISDA consultation on final parameters for the
spread and term adjustments’, 15 November 2019. https://assets.isda.org/media/3e16cdd2/d1b3283f-
pdf/ (accessed 10 August 2024).
4 Financial Conduct Authority (UK), ‘Article 23D benchmarks regulation: Draft notice of requirements’,
29 September 2021. https://www.fca.org.uk/publication/libor-notices/article-23d-benchmarks-
regulation-draft-requirements-notice.pdf (accessed 10 August 2024).
Page 3 of 5
The MPG is currently finalising its work on the adjustment spread methodology to
ensure that the chosen methodology considers all the idiosyncratic factors that would
concern market participants.
It is also important for market participants not to over-rely on fallbacks to facilitate
legacy Jibar referencing contracts. The best way to minimise risks would be to actively
migrate to ZARONIA referencing contracts as soon as practicable.5
There will nonetheless be instances where, despite best efforts, it may not be possible
to transition or adjust certain contracts before Jibar ceases. These so-called tough
legacy contracts will require regulatory measures to facilitate their transition. As such,
it may be necessary for the MPG to consider a synthetic Jibar, similar in structure to
the current forward-looking Jibar, to minimise the impact on systems and processes.
Furthermore, the MPG, the SARB and the Financial Sector Conduct Authority will
consult with National Treasury on the appropriate regulatory instruments for ensuring
contract continuity and safe harbour provisions for the protection of contract parties,
supervisors and the benchmark administrator.
Building a new foundation
Shortly after the MPG Conference in April 2023, the remaining US dollar LIBOR panels
were discontinued. This concluded a massive decade-long global project to replace
LIBOR.6 Reflecting on this effort, the co-chairs of the Financial Stability Board’s Official
Sector Steering Group, Nikhil Rathi and John C Williams, concluded that it had been
like building a new foundation under an existing home – an undertaking of extreme
difficulty, one many doubted would succeed, and which they did not wish to repeat.7
It is remarkable that we have had a largely smooth LIBOR transition, and local
institutions should be commended for managing their LIBOR exposures effectively.
However, in South Africa we are not yet at the stage where we can relax, enjoy our
new foundation and promise ourselves that we never want to renovate again. We are
5 Financial Stability Board, ‘FSB statement to support preparations for LIBOR cessation’,
19 November 2021. https://www.fsb.org/2021/11/fsb-statement-to-support-preparations-for-libor-
cessation/ (accessed 10 August 2024).
6 Financial Stability Board, ‘Progress report on LIBOR and other benchmarks transition issues:
Reaching the finishing line of LIBOR transition and securing robust reference rates for the future’,
16 December 2022. https://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P161222.pdf (accessed 10 August 2024).
7 N Rathi and J C Williams, ‘Innovating for the future, heeding lessons from the past’, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, The Teller Window, 17 August 2023.
https://tellerwindow.newyorkfed.org/2023/08/17/innovating-for-the-future-heeding-lessons-from-the-
past/ (accessed 10 august 2024).
Page 4 of 5
only now embarking on a critical stage of the ‘Jibar transition roadmap’,8 which requires
market participants to start trading ZARONIA-based securities in earnest.
A poorly coordinated transition, or delayed action by market participants, could result
in market disruption and undesirable cliff effects. Consequently, market participants
should consider a smooth Jibar transition as a strategic priority, both for their own
organisations and the larger financial system.
Last year, I asked market participants to consider elevating the Jibar transition
discourse in their organisations and to establish transition programmes, with visibility
at the executive board level. This work is ever more urgent today.
Concluding remarks
To conclude, global reference rate reforms were triggered by serious weaknesses in
existing benchmarks. These included design failings, glaring cases of market
manipulation, and structural shifts in the markets underpinning benchmarks. The
responsible authorities had no choice but to reform. But reference rate transitions
cannot succeed if market participants do not join in the journey.
I hope you will look at this transition not as a chore or a burden to be taken on with
great reluctance, but as an opportunity – an opportunity to build better markets as we
navigate together to a new benchmark.
There are uncertainties contained in the Jibar transition plan. None of the listed
milestones and timelines are cast in stone. At best, they reflect the MPG’s best
estimates given the knowledge and information at hand. It is possible that some
milestones may need to be shifted now and again. Nonetheless, the MPG will
endeavour to manage the uncertainties and continue to engage all stakeholders and
provide clarity where necessary.
I hope you enjoy the rest of the conference.
Thank you.
8 Market Practitioners Group, Transition Planning and Coordination Workstream, ‘Update on the Jibar
transition plan’, 2024. https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/financial-
markets/committees/mpg/mpg-ralated-documents/2024/update-on-the-Jibar-transition-plan.pdf
(accessed 10 August 2024).
Page 5 of 5