Titulo: An address by Lesetja Kganyago Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the memorial service for the late Dr Sam Motsuenyane
Data: 2024-05-07
Palestrante (estimado): Lesetja Kganyago Governor
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2024/An-address-by-Lesetja-Kganyago-SARB-Governor-at-the-memorial-service-for-the-late-Dr-Sam-Motsuenyane
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2024/An%20address%20by%20SARB%20Governor%20Lesetja%20Kganyago%20at%20the%20memorial%20service%20for%20the%20late%20Dr%20Sam%20Motsuenyane.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Address by Lesetja Kganyago,
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,
at the memorial service for the late Dr Sam Motsuenyane,
7 May 2024
Honouring the life and legacy of a doyen of black business
Good afternoon, and let me once again share my deepest condolences to Mme
Motsuenyane and the family, the Bakwena-ba-Modimosana farming clan and
Dr Motsuenyane’s many near and dear friends.
There are so many black men and women in South Africa who can relay a story of
when they first heard about the legendary Sam Motsuenyane – starting as far back as
the 60s, 70s, 80s and, of course, the decades that followed. I mentioned those three
decades specifically because, as a black person, and an African in particular, it was
painfully difficult to start a business, to operate in a politically volatile and economically
hostile environment. But Dr Motsuenyane took the courageous decision to defy the
apartheid policies aimed at excluding him from the formal economy. And defy the odds,
he surely did.
I was a youngster when the tales of him and other doyens of black business were
shared with me by our elders. There was such respect and pride when these stories
were told of a man who was relentless in his drive for excellence, for success, for
growth, for wealth creation, for economic development, and most importantly, for
uplifting communities. For nearly eight decades, he worked tirelessly across so many
areas – starting with the founding of Nafcoc in 1964, followed by a dream to establish
a bank that would serve the unbanked and underserved African community. That
perseverance and determination paid off. When I visited him in Winterveldt, he
lamented the many members of his family and friends who told him to throw in the
towel when it seemed they were not going to raise the capital needed to get a banking
licence. But true entrepreneurs do not give up. Inspired by black business owners in
the United States who had established their own bank, he and others set out to
convince people from across the country to invest. Any amount, big or small, was
welcomed as they moved one step closer to realising this dream. A genius strategic
move sealed the deal.
In 1972, he, together with a group of businesspeople, set out to meet Anthony Keith,
the Chairperson of Barclays Bank in London. Their clarity of vision and commercially
1
driven strategy led Barclays to not only invest in the bank, but also provide training to
its executive and staff. With such a powerful endorsement, they were able to raise the
rest of the money from individuals and businesses from across the black community.
They secured the R1 million needed to apply for a banking licence. But the officials at
the SARB did not make it easy for the first black-only consortium seeking to open a
bank. Even with the backing from Barclays, they were sent from pillar to post in what
can only be described as efforts to block this application. Again, there was no giving
up on their part. And so, whatever the SARB requested, they provided, until finally, and
after the requirements were met, the banking licence was issued in 1975.
The story of African Bank has been one of highs and lows. He told me about their daily
battles to manage customers, creditors, the regulator, suppliers, and their investors.
He was at pains sharing the story about when the bank was placed into custodianship
of then Trust Bank because they had broken exchange control rules. The bank had
new shareholders and Nafcoc’s influence had diminished significantly. Towards the
end of his tenure as chairperson of the bank, he was no longer happy with the direction
the institution was heading into, moving away from savings and focusing mostly on
lending. It was his wish to claim the bank back and move it back towards its founding
vision – to serve and provide financial services to the marginalised and underserved.
It was for this reason that I opened a bank account with African Bank in Plein Street,
Johannesburg, in the early 80s. It was an institution that I could relate to as a black
South African, an institution that spoke to me in a manner that was respectful – it spoke
to me, not about me. It was an institution I was proud to keep my savings at. Knowing
what I know now about banking, especially if you have a savings account, I would not
have opened that account. They were distributing marketing pamphlets in Hoek Street,
incentivising customers to keep a minimum of R250 in their savings book for 12
months. At the end of 12 months they would add, I think, R50 to your balance. I took
the bait, and it paid off. So there I was 12 months later with R300 in my savings
account. The problem was that my father discovered that I had that amount in my
account and decided to cut my weekly allowance. So much for creating a culture of
savings.
Dr Motsuenyane was a man who led from the front. After the 1994 elections, he served
as Leader of the House in the Senate, now known as the Council of Provinces. He put
black economic empowerment firmly on Parliament’s agenda. This led to various
pieces of legislation. His talents in public service, together with a penchant for
diplomacy and patience, led to the next move. After two years as a senator, Tata
Nelson Mandela asked him to serve as Ambassador to the Gulf States – Saudi Arabia,
Oman, Bahrain, Kuwait and Yemen ‒ a post he held until 2000.
Farming and agriculture – an equally deep passion of his, led to the Winterveldt Citrus
Project, which brought together farmers to provide fruit to retailers across the country.
He spoke to me about farming in the same way he did about starting Nafcoc and
African Bank ‒ with passion and pride.
2
When we met virtually during COVID-19, I was struck by his energy, and despite his
age, he did not seem to be slowing down. Later, he wanted us to meet in person and
wanted to come to the Reserve Bank offices. You can imagine my response – I told
him that it was my duty to pay homage to him. That led to one of my most memorable
experiences – spending time with Dr Sam Motsuenyane on his farm in Winterveldt.
We spent the day talking about his love for agriculture, from cattle farming to his citrus
farm, and his nursery that provided seedlings to other farms. But our conversation
somehow kept circling back to African Bank. He told me that he had set aside his
family money to buy shares in African Bank when it lists or sells shares. At some point,
he asked me what my home totem was, and I told him, “Ke Mokwena wa meetse a
pula”. He stood up, shook my hand and said, “Le nna ke Mokwena”. I knew the
crocodiles had connected.
Reflecting on such a wonderful human being, it was fitting that he was honoured with
the National Order of the Baobab (Gold) in recognition of his role in fostering the
development of black-owned businesses and economic liberation. He lived an
exemplary life, one that was in true service of humankind. Robala ka khotso Mokwena!
3