Titulo: Lesetja Kganyago | Address at the G20 TechSprint
Data: 2025-11-11
Palestrante (estimado): Lesetja Kganyago
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2025/kganyago-techsprint
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2025/kganyago-techsprint.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Opening address by Lesetja Kganyago,
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the
2025 G20 TechSprint Awards Ceremony,
Pretoria, 11 November 2025
Good afternoon.
As you know, we are nearly at the end of our G20 Presidency. The Finance Track was
handed over to the United States last month, and we have turned our attention to the
Leaders’ Summit in just over a week. This TechSprint meeting has the distinction of
being our last landmark event as the Finance Track in 2025.
It is fitting that we are finishing our presidency with this subject of trust and integrity in
finance. A core principle of our presidency was that we would not pack the agenda
with more topics and more working groups. We wanted to avoid ‘priority proliferation’.
Instead, we aimed to be disciplined about the agenda and put the Finance Track
spotlight on existing issues that were significantly important for us. A top issue was
inclusivity and innovation in finance.
There is a lot of change in this space currently – some that works well, others not so
much.
Domestically, and I take South Africa as an example, we remain excessively
dependent on paper-based systems. That includes processes for verifying identity,
from loan applications, to making payments. There is also the use of cash, which
remains the most popular tool for transacting in South Africa – despite the existence
of more sophisticated alternatives. The South African Reserve Bank (SARB) has
embarked on a major initiative to address this, and deliver a more digital, inclusive
future.
From a global perspective, cross-border finance remains cumbersome and expensive.
This is nowhere more true than in Africa. Moving money from one country to another
is an inefficient process, especially for poorer people. We still live in a world where it
can make more sense for earners in South Africa to send money home to Zimbabwe
by putting someone on a taxi with the cash. It is not quite the Stone Age – but it is
close.
Technologically, of course, we have the ability to do much better. But, if the problem
were that easy, it would have been solved already. Unfortunately, there are many
challenges in this space that remain unsolved, and which are holding up
transformative progress.
This G20 TechSprint is based on three of these problems.
• The first is digital identity: We need verifiable, privacy-preserving technologies to
establish trust among financial institutions and enable broader financial
participation.
• The second is credit data portability: We need secure, consumer-consented data
exchange solutions so credit data can go to work and improve access to finance.
• The third is fraud and cyber risk mitigation: We need payment efficiencies that are
matched with technologies to significantly reduce fraud and cyber risks.
Here at the SARB, we value innovation. At the same time, we appreciate that
innovation is rarely driven by established institutions. Our comparative advantage is
really about managing the macroeconomic and regulatory environments in which
households and firms can thrive.
Innovation, by contrast, usually comes from different teams having the freedom to
experiment. Often they are working in labs, or even garages, rather than towers in
capital cities.1 Innovation means taking risks, trying out different ideas and being open
to imaginative concepts.2
The Bank for International Settlements (BIS) has been convening these TechSprint
competitions for five years now, and we are honoured to have been the co-host this
year. Our two institutions both strongly believe in the philosophy of the techsprints: to
take on major public policy issues, identify the problems that need solving and open
them to innovators of all backgrounds.
For this G20 TechSprint, we had over 165 entries from 30 countries. Of these, we have
15 finalists.
I would like to congratulate the 15 finalists, who have made it here against intense
competition. To the other entrants, my team has told me there were many wonderful
ideas submitted, including some that did not match the criteria but that were
nonetheless brilliant.
We ran a rigorous judging progress, with the BIS and sector experts, but there are
many winning ideas in history that were not recognised straight away. Maybe there
are some of those here today too.
To all the teams, thank you for entering. Thank you for innovating. As the Nobel
committee reminded us this year, innovation is the fundamental driver of prosperity
and it is people like you who lead it.3 We are going to have a financial system in the
future that is more open, inclusive and secure ‒ and it may well be ideas in this room
that get us there.
Thank you.
1 On garage start-ups, see for instance this article: “Starting in a garage is crucial to the origin story of
many Silicon Valley entrepreneurs.”
2 For a larger discussion of this theme, see Carl Benedikt Frey. 2025. How Progress Ends.
3 The prize was awarded to Joel Mokyr, Philippe Aghion, and Peter Howitt, “for having explained
innovation-driven economic growth”. See https://www.nobelprize.org/uploads/2025/10/press-
economicsciences2025-1.pdf