Titulo: Lesetja Kganyago | Exchange rates and tariffs
Data: 2025-10-10
Palestrante (estimado): Lesetja Kganyago
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2025/kganyago-rates-tariffs
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2025/kganyago-rates-tariffs.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Address by Lesetja Kganyago,
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,
at the Kgalema Motlanthe Foundation
Drakensberg Inclusive Growth Forum,
10 October 2025
Exchange rates and tariffs
Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for the opportunity to address you today. I am
grateful to former President Kgalema Motlanthe and his Foundation for convening this
forum, and it is a pleasure to be with you all here in the beautiful Drakensberg.
The theme chosen for my address – exchange rates and tariffs – speaks to both an
old problem and a new one. The old problem is the alignment – and misalignment –
of exchange rates. This remains a subject of perennial interest in global
macroeconomics, with each decade marked by its own controversies. The new
problem is tariffs, which is new in the sense that, until this year, we lived in a world
where all the leading countries favoured openness to trade, and had done so for
decades. We no longer live in that world. What does this mean for our economy?
Exchange rate effects of tariffs
Let me start with the relationship between tariffs and the exchange rate, and
specifically with the textbook account. The textbook says that, when a country imposes
tariffs on trade, it will make itself more expensive. For instance, tariffs on cars or fridges
1
make imports costlier and allow domestic producers to charge higher prices.1
Furthermore, as people reduce their consumption of traded goods, they supply less
currency to foreign exchange markets, which tends to strengthen the local exchange
rate.2
Economists like to talk about the real exchange rate, which is the exchange rate
adjusted for the difference in inflation between two countries. The textbook account
makes it pretty clear that tariffs tend to appreciate a country’s real exchange rate, by
moving both the domestic price level and the exchange rate itself.3
At the beginning of this year, it seemed the simple textbook account was all we needed
to understand the world. The new United States (US) administration moved quickly
towards much higher tariffs. The dollar promptly appreciated; by some measures, it hit
a multi-decade high in January.4 US inflation also started to edge up, and the
differentials with major trading partners began widening. All this made the US more
expensive to trade with.
The twist, however, is that from January onwards, the dollar has weakened.
Depending on the measure used, it has depreciated by around 7−8% from its January
peak. There isn’t much evidence that foreigners are dumping their US assets, but there
is evidence that they are hedging their dollar positions more aggressively.5 We must
also bear in mind that the dollar has been relatively strong over the past few years, so
it made sense that it would correct towards more normal values, not least because US
interest rates have eased lower.
One implication of all this is that 2025 has been a better year for emerging markets
than many had feared. The adverse scenario for emerging markets was a wicked mix
1 Ralph Ossa “In a world of trade tensions, what do tariffs really do?” 11 April 2025. Available at:
https://www.wto.org/english/blogs_e/ce_ralph_ossa_e/blog_ro_11apr25_e.htm
2 For instance, see this post by Greg Mankiw (author of a famous introductory economics textbook):
https://gregmankiw.blogspot.com/2025/03/kevin-hassett-forgets-econ-101.html
3 Davide Furceri et al. “Macroeconomic consequences of tariffs” October 2018. Available at:
https://www.imf.org/-/media/Files/News/Seminars/2018/ARC2018/s4-furceri.ashx
4 For instance, the US Federal Reserve compiles nominal and real broad dollar indices which go back
to 2006; both hit their highest recorded values in January 2025.
5 Hyun Song Shin et al. “US dollar’s slide in April 2025: the role of FX hedging” 20 June 2025.
Available at: https://www.bis.org/publ/bisbull105.pdf
2
of a strong dollar, high US interest rates, and tariffs that hurt our export industries.
While we still have the tariffs to grapple with, the other factors have been more
favourable.
For South Africa, it has been a year marked by rising terms of trade, a stronger and
less volatile rand, and lower domestic interest rates across the yield curve. Given the
risks involved, this is one of the more positive outcomes we could have hoped for. It
is a relief that things did not turn out worse.
The exchange rate and growth
We cracked open the textbook earlier to check the standard relationship between
tariffs and the exchange rate, so let us now do the same for the economic effects of
an exchange rate appreciation. The way this subject is usually introduced in
economics classes is through the Mundell−Fleming framework. This simple and
elegant model demonstrates that currency depreciation boosts growth, given certain
assumptions. The short version is that a cheaper currency leads to importing less and
exporting more, which expands aggregate output. Equivalently, a stronger currency is
considered growth negative.
Once again, the reasoning is clear, but the textbook conclusion seems to be at odds
with the facts. Should rand appreciation really be viewed as bad news? It is puzzling,
because for much of the past 10 years or so, we have generally had a weaker
exchange rate, yet this has coincided with extremely low growth.
Indeed, back in the late 2000s, it was often argued that South Africa’s real exchange
rate was too strong and too volatile.6 This indicator has since become significantly
weaker and less volatile.7 If you consider indicators of purchasing power parity, such
as the simple Big Mac Index, you see that for the rand to have the same buying power
in the US as it does here, the exchange rate would need to be around 50−60%
stronger. 8 More sophisticated measures of purchasing power parity suggest that equal
6 Ricardo Hausmann. “Final recommendations of the International Panel on ASGISA” May 2008
Available at: https://growthlab.hks.harvard.edu/files/growthlab/files/161.pdf
7 For instance, the Bank for International Settlements’ real effective exchange rate (REER) measure
was 27% stronger for the period 1994−2014 versus 2014−2025, and the standard deviation of the
series was about 10 percentage points higher.
8 https://www.economist.com/interactive/big-mac-index
3
buying power would require an exchange rate close to R8 per dollar.9 It seems clear
that the rand has been cheap, yet this has not triggered more growth. As far as I can
tell, the main effect has been to stop people talking much about the real effective
exchange rate.
One explanation for this missing growth relationship is that a currency sometimes
reflects larger developments in a country, in the same way that a share price speaks
to the heath of a company. If a country looks good, investors are impressed, and the
currency appreciates. By the same token, if they lose confidence, they sell. When you
have good news stories, such as structural reforms, fiscal discipline and effective
governance, you get growth, and at the same time you get currency gains. When you
have bad news stories, such as state capture, unsustainable debt growth and junk
status, growth weakens and the currency follows suit. This reminds us that while a
competitive exchange rate is indeed a valuable policy good, it is no panacea. Worse
still, a currency can be undervalued for all the wrong reasons, in which case the
standard benefits do not apply.
Another consideration is that growth benefits from imports as well as exports.10 It is
really not the case that exporters are always winners, importers are losers, or that
countries should compete to import as little as possible – even if that mercantilist
thinking gains some traction from time to time.
For a start, export industries often benefit from imported components, and much the
same goes for most other industries. Indeed, capital goods for investment are often
imported, and almost all economies will find it more efficient to buy these items on
global markets rather than develop them domestically. For instance, most airlines
acquire their planes from Boeing or Airbus. This may help explain why many emerging
markets tend to invest more when their currencies are stronger, and this extra
investment raises growth.11
9 This references the World Bank’s purchasing power parity (PPP) conversion factors: For South
Africa, they estimate a factor of 7.4 in 2024, which means that for PPP to hold, the rand should have
traded at 7.4 to the US dollar last year, rather than its actual exchange rate of 18.3.
10 Lawrence Edwards and Ayanda Hlatshwayo. “Exchange rates and firm export performance in
South Africa” January 2020. Available at:
https://www.wider.unu.edu/sites/default/files/Publications/Working-paper/PDF/wp2020-1.pdf
11 Steve Brito et al. “Real Exchange Rates, Economic Complexity, and Investment” 10 May 2018.
Available at: https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2018/05/10/Real-Exchange-Rates-
Economic-Complexity-and-Investment-45867
4
That does not mean you should aim for the strongest exchange rate possible, of
course. But it does suggest a balanced approach that also considers the benefits of
imports.
South Africa’s exchange rate policy and dynamics
As you know, in South Africa we have long applied a policy of exchange rate flexibility.
We came by this the hard way: we used to intervene in the exchange rate, and we got
burnt, losing billions of dollars and credibility as well, because the interventions did not
achieve their goals.
Our policy of flexibility has worked well for us. The exchange rate acts as a shock
absorber for the economy, repricing assets and tradables to keep locals competitive,
even during events like commodity price movements. Because South African
households and firms do not hold a lot of foreign currency debt, sharp declines in the
rand do not create financial instability – which has been a major problem in some other
economies. And the South African Reserve Bank has been able to build credibility
around its inflation target, ensuring that rand movements do not pass through to
inflation at a high rate.
All that said, there are still some aspects of our exchange rate regime that are hard to
enjoy. One is the trend of depreciation. Everyone remembers when the rand was
stronger – at seven to the dollar, for example, compared to seventeen now. Another
is volatility. While we still do not have much evidence that volatility disrupts economic
activity in South Africa, South Africans certainly like to joke about how the rand has
more mood swings than a teenager, or that it is the drama queen of emerging market
currencies.
Our commitment to a free-floating exchange rate is now 27 years old – we started in
1998 – and I would like to suggest that we are now outgrowing some of this drama
and settling down to a more mature stage of life.
One of the key drivers here is the shift towards permanently lower inflation. As many
of you will know, this year we expressed a preference for inflation to settle at the
bottom of our 3−6% target range. As we have often argued, our inflation rate is out of
line with our peers and competitors. Most advanced economies target 2%. Emerging
markets used to be much higher, but nowadays they commonly target rates between
5
2% and 4%, with a middle-income median of 3%. We have stuck with a 3−6% target
range for 25 years – a quarter of a century – but this range is too high and too broad.
It has left us as inflation outliers.
Unfortunately, if you aim for a high inflation rate, you end up raising prices faster than
other countries. The implication is that you need your currency to depreciate, to
compensate and keep the real exchange rate stable. The result is a kind of ‘damned-
if-you-do, damned-if-you-don’t’ trap: either you get a perennially weaker currency, with
all its disappointments, or you don’t, and you lose competitiveness.
This no longer applies if you have an inflation close to that of your peers – as we now
do. To give a clear example, there used to be a large gap between our inflation rate
and the US inflation rate. In 2016, it was 5 percentage points. Last year, the difference
was less than 1 percentage point, and it is expected to stay small. Under these
circumstances, the exchange rate should behave differently too.
I would also like more people to recognise that rand volatility has declined. Option-
implied volatility is now at long-term lows. Yet, outside of financial markets, most
people still believe the rand is a highly volatile currency. The only problem with this
view is that it no longer describes the facts in front of us.
A last point I would like to see more widely recognised is, back in 1998, we had
negative foreign exchange reserves. That made us vulnerable. We filled in that hole
during the 2000s, and we have gradually grown reserves since. I am not sure if it is
widely appreciated how much stronger our position has grown. In August, we
surpassed US$70 billion for the first time. While that is partly a story about gold prices,
it is not just about gold. For the first time, we satisfy all the major reserve adequacy
metrics, including the International Monetary Fund’s own measure. Alongside our
positive net international investment position, our external position is arguably as
strong as it has ever been. If the rand gets uncomfortably strong, we would be happy
to accumulate more reserves.
Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, to conclude, global conditions are clearly challenging. The
domestic environment has its challenges too. Fortunately, it is not all bad news. So far
this year, global conditions have changed in ways that are, unexpectedly, quite
6
supportive of emerging markets, with a weaker dollar, stronger terms of trade, and
lower interest rates. South Africa has shared in these benefits. You asked me to talk
about exchange rate conditions, and I have explored how an exchange rate shapes
output, and how our South African policy conversation has evolved over the years. We
have travelled a long road, but a welcome destination is now in sight. South Africa’s
external position has strengthened markedly. So, when people tell you the rand is a
weak and volatile currency, encourage them to think again.
Thank you.
7