Titulo: Lesetja Kganyago | Challenges of the Group of Twenty
Data: 2025-04-22
Palestrante (estimado): Lesetja Kganyago
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2025/kganyago-g20-challenges
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2025/kganyago-brookings-2025-4.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Keynote address by Lesetja Kganyago,
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,
at the Brookings Institution,
Washington DC, 22 April 2025
Challenges of the Group of Twenty
Good morning.
Thank you for inviting me to Brookings. We have long benefited from your expertise,
most recently when one of your fellows, Don Kohn, gave a star performance last month
at our South African Reserve Bank Research Conference in Cape Town. It is great to
be with you in DC today.
The focus of my talk is the Group of Twenty (G20), for which South Africa currently
has the presidency. As you will all know, the G20 started in the 1990s as an informal
arrangement for discussing macroeconomic developments and financial stability. It
was designated the premier forum for international economic cooperation during the
Global Financial Crisis (GFC)1 and, at the time, it proved this status was well
deserved.2
It did this by demonstrating two great strengths.
1 This formulation appeared in the 2009 Pittsburgh Summit Leaders’ Statement, available here:
https://www.g20.utoronto.ca/2009/2009communique0925.html
2 See, for instance, the expansion of resources for multilateral institutions described in the London
Declaration, available here: https://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pr/2009/pdf/g20_040209.pdf
1
First, unlike the Group of Seven, it brought together all the major economies, not just
the richer ones. This balanced participation made it a genuinely global institution.
Second, it was just small enough that it could act decisively.
In the years since the GFC, the G20 has worked on many important issues, with some
real successes. The global regulatory reform agenda stands out as perhaps one of the
most significant achievements of the G20. Today we can say the core of the global
financial system is more resilient than it was during the GFC.
The G20 has demonstrated its value during crises, most notably at the onset of the
COVID-19 pandemic, where it served as a central forum for coordinating responses
and mobilising finance.
It has strengthened the global financial safety net, with a better-resourced International
Monetary Fund at its centre, and has facilitated expanded resource commitments for
the multilateral development banks.
In 2020, the Debt Service Suspension Initiative helped create fiscal space for poor
countries at a moment of great peril. The Common Framework that grew out of this is
still the most promising mechanism available for working out unsustainable sovereign
debts.
It is a testament to the G20’s value that even now, at a time of extraordinary global
change, all its members agree about its importance, and all of them are committed to
continuing its work.
At the same time, I think we are all in agreement that the G20 faces many challenges.
I would like to discuss some of them today as a prelude to the discussion to come. I
hope you will forgive me for focusing today on how process subverts better policy
formulation, but I believe this is a serious concern and detracts from what the G20
might achieve.
Let me start by drawing attention to the need for more focused agenda-setting,
supported by better processes.
2
From a very operational perspective, G20 meetings are large. There is a rule of thumb,
sometimes called Parkinson’s law,3 that the maximum size of an effective committee
is around 20 participants. Once you get past that threshold, it seems to become difficult
to make decisions efficiently.
It would seem that an organisation called the G20 would be perfectly designed for
satisfying Parkinson’s law. But, in addition to the G20’s 21 members, we also have a
roster of invited countries and many international organisations. Counting in these
invited participants, we had a total of 52 countries and institutions at our recent Finance
Ministers and Central Bank Governors meeting in Cape Town.4
In this context, it can be challenging to have spontaneous conversations and robust
debates.
One high-level observation is that the G20 functions best in a global crisis. Minds are
focused and participants move quickly to find each other in identifying root causes,
analysing options and defining the path forward. I think of the meetings of Washington
in 2008, London in 2009, and Toronto and Pittsburgh in 2010 as exemplars.
Once we are no longer in the throes of a crisis, it becomes harder to find purpose.
When we say, for instance, that the G20’s relevance is fading, I think we mean that
the agenda, always rich in topics, is overloaded and too complex. While there are
many agenda items suitable for reasoned, technocratic discussions, such as
improving payment systems or helping heavily indebted poor countries, the G20
cannot effectively address itself to all of them.
Against this, the G20 has powerful mechanisms for adding issues to its agenda. Each
year, we have a new presidency, and each presidency wants to make its mark by
3 For a discussion, see R I Sutton and H Rao, The Friction Project, New York: St. Martin's Press, 2024,
p 13.
4 The G20 comprises 19 countries plus the African Union and the European Union (EU) (with the
European Central Bank, European Council and European Commission being counted with the EU, not
separately). The 10 invited countries were Egypt, Ireland, Netherlands, Norway, Nigeria, Singapore,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Arab Emirates. The 21 international organisations included
one regional organisation, the Southern African Development Community.
3
putting new issues on the table. This means we add more than we subtract. Because
the G20 is powerful, prestigious and global, it is tempting to bring it all the problems of
the world. It does not follow, however, that, just because something is important, it
should be on the G20’s agenda. There are many important issues for which the G20
is not the right forum.
So, we should be more intentional in how we choose which issues to discuss –
especially when the world is in between crises. Narrowing the G20’s scope might also
make for more focused discussions that say something more meaningful about the top
two or three priorities chosen each year.
Keeping those priorities central to our discussions would also encourage a better kind
of engagement – more intimate conversations that help participants find each other
and craft common views.
In the end, with too much content and not enough conversation, our messaging and
communication becomes loaded with vague ‘priors’ rather than more concrete
solutions. We tend to sacrifice clarity and purpose in favour of finding relevance among
only the most specialist audiences.
Refocusing on solutions would help to avoid falling into the trap of drafting long and
formulaic communiqués. Finally, we would do better by having shorter statements,
written in plain language.
Of course, it is easier to communicate when you have clear decisions to share. The
path here is to zero in on our inherently common challenges and then to work harder,
partly with better agenda-setting, to develop common views.
In its early years, the G20 worked well for economic and financial stability issues. We
need to preserve that focus and enhance it.
Another way of doing this could be to separate the various tracks, making them more
distinct from one another, creating the space for the principals of the G20 Finance
Track to focus, in part, on defining the agenda. Such a step might also mean rethinking
4
the structure of the Finance Track itself and of its multiple working groups and their
processes.
It has also been suggested that we should establish a permanent G20 secretariat.
There are obstacles to this, including who hosts it, who gets which roles and who foots
the bill. We would have to be very disciplined about keeping it small, meritocratic and
well governed.
That said, establishing a secretariat for each track might address the problem that
each year a new country assumes the presidency, puts in a huge effort and financial
resources to learn the ropes, and then, just as it starts to really understand the system,
its term is over and someone else starts all over again.
I cannot say I’m convinced a secretariat for each standalone track is a good idea, but
maybe it is better than what we have now. It would be great to hear other suggestions.
To conclude, one of the best parts of the G20 is building relationships and social capital
through meeting regularly. In doing so, we enhance our ability to cooperate in crises,
gaining perspective and defining better, sustainable solutions.
Such a dynamic and engaged process is arguably even more critical now as the global
community feels its way into a new era. It is in these times that we will find it harder to
agree, and it therefore becomes more important to hear each other and seek to
redefine our common interests. That there may be contestation over certain topics and
how to approach them is a positive outcome of the G20, not a weakness. This is where
value we add should, in fact, be found.
The G20 remains the premier forum for international economic cooperation, and
should not have to be reinvented for every crisis. There is no doubt that global
cooperation is difficult, even in less crisis-prone times. But the alternatives are worse.
And the G20 could, with concerted effort, reach its previous levels of excellence.
Thank you.
5