Titulo: Fundi Tshazibana | Financial policy in the era of the climate crisis: An African perspective
Data: 2025-10-15
Palestrante (estimado): Fundi Tshazibana
URL: https://www.resbank.co.za/en/home/publications/publication-detail-pages/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2025/tshazibana-financial-climate-policy
Fonte do texto: pdf (https://www.resbank.co.za/content/dam/sarb/publications/speeches/speeches-by-governors/2025/tshazibana-financial-climate-policy.pdf)
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Address by Fundi Tshazibana,
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,
at the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London,
15 October 2025
Financial policy in the era of the climate crisis: An African perspective
Good evening.
It is a great pleasure to be here at the School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS).
I would like to thank Vice-Chancellor Adam Habib and Provost Joanna Newman for
their kind invitation.
Throughout its history, SOAS has nurtured leaders who are committed to tackling the
systemic causes of social injustice and economic underdevelopment. This legacy is
particularly visible in South Africa, where distinguished alumni include both our serving
Minister of Finance and the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB).
Today, the call for such leadership is especially urgent as we confront the challenges
of climate change.
While my main focus will be on the issues we face in South Africa, it is important to
note that climate change creates similar challenges across other African countries.
This year, under our Group of Twenty (G20) Presidency, we have prioritised scaling
up sustainable finance to address Africa's key development challenges. The
Sustainable Finance Working Group is actively developing recommendations to
strengthen the global financial architecture, boost financing for climate adaptation, and
unlock the potential of carbon credit markets. This focus has also been mirrored in
other G20 groups.
South Africa is leveraging its leadership role to forge the global partnerships necessary
to dismantle financial barriers to climate action. In this regard, we have partnered with
institutions such as the African Development Bank, the Network for Greening the
Financial System (NGFS), the International Association for Insurance Supervisors, the
1
World Bank, and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development,
among others.
Climate change is a global problem, yet the ways in which climate-related risks
materialise are diverse. The scenarios developed by the NGFS highlight that climate-
related risks are likely to be larger in many emerging market and developing countries.
In the G20 work we did with the African Development Bank, it was clear that Africa is
especially vulnerable, not only due to its geography and reliance on climate-sensitive
sectors such as agriculture, but also due to historical underinvestment in resilience-
building and structural inequalities. Several systemic barriers, such as financial system
vulnerability and the high cost of capital, amplify Africa's vulnerability to the impacts of
climate change. One might argue that, while there may be homogenous regional
elements, each country on the continent has its own unique vulnerabilities and
different capacities to respond. This means that, to be effective, policy responses must
be tailored to the specific circumstances of each nation. With that in mind, please note
that many of the points I make today will be applicable to some countries, but not all.
Much of my focus will be on highlighting Africa’s diversity as a region.
At the SARB, we take great pride in our steadfast commitment to advancing our
country’s green agenda. Many other central banks have taken similar positions, as
demonstrated by the establishment of the Network for Greening the Financial System
in 2017.1
This central bank focus on climate, however, raises a crucial question: Does this
expanded focus align with their primary mandate of maintaining price stability, as well
as with their clearly defined legislative responsibilities?
After all, in recent times, central banks’ objectives have given the greatest weight to
controlling inflation and financial stability. Their widespread adoption of inflation-
targeting frameworks has led to significant successes – so why divert their focus from
this main task? There have also been arguments that the current inflation-
management toolbox was not designed to address climate-related objectives, and
these new goals are likely to clash with anti-inflation measures or, at the very least,
muddy the waters.
1 NGFS, ‘Joint statement by the Founding Members of the Central Banks and Supervisors Network for Greening
the Financial System', 12 December 2017, https://www.ngfs.net/en/press-release/joint-statement-founding-
members-central-banks-and-supervisors-network-greening-financial-system
2
In this regard, while most central banks now implement climate-related strategies and
actions, there are also informed voices2,3 arguing that central banks should play little
or no role in their countries’ climate change strategies.4,5
So, what is the right approach? More importantly, which side is right for central banks
in Africa?
That is the question I will be looking at this evening, drawing on my experience as an
African central banker.
Let me simplify things by providing my conclusions upfront. Both sides are right.
Central banks have important roles to play in a country’s climate strategy, but they are
indirect roles aimed at strengthening the long-term financial resilience of the economy,
instead of modifying central banks’ direct short-term inflation targeting measures.
The logic is straightforward:
If climate risks – both physical and transition risks – contribute to price and
financial instability, they become the concern of central banks.
An economy with high inflation and financial instability cripples investment.
Historically, we have observed that these conditions drive up borrowing costs, halt
long-term funding, and trigger capital flight – all of which affect structural foundations
of any economy. A stable economy is the foundation of development finance. Yet as
climate change and the responses to it change price formation, reshape markets and
affect investor confidence, central banks have no choice but to address these risks –
both to safeguard financial stability and steer the transition towards a more resilient
economy.
Understanding the impact of climate-related risks on livelihoods, infrastructure and
public policy is particularly crucial in an African context. In just these past three years,
we have experienced on our continent how drought not only affects agricultural output
and exports, but also has significant inflationary effects, impacts electricity production
across sectors, and undermines the soundness of financial institutions and tax
collection. All these issues, save one, are the business of central banks.
Understanding these country-specific differences implies that, in policy application, we
cannot have a copy-and-paste approach. Financial policies for climate resilience in
Africa will fail if they simply copy models from advanced economies. Success requires
2 L P Hansen, ‘Central banking challenges posed by uncertain climate change and natural disasters’ Journal of
Monetary Economics, 125(C), 2022, pp 1–15. DOI: 10.1016/j.jmoneco.2021.09.010
3 H Davies, ‘Central Bankers’ Green Lines’, Project Syndicate, 19 January 2023, https://www.project-
syndicate.org/commentary/central-banks-increasingly-divided-over-climate-change-by-howard-davies-2023-
01
4 Ibid
5 O Issing, ‘Central banks aren’t responsible for fighting climate change – governments are’, World Economic
Forum Stories, 5 December 2019, https://www.weforum.org/stories/2019/12/this-is-the-problem-with-
central-banks-fighting-climate-change/
3
simultaneously addressing the continent's broader barriers to finance and economic
growth.
By positioning things in this way, I am not suggesting that central banks should take
over the role of other public institutions in climate policy. Rather, I am saying they must
be in a position to manage risks, as these risks will affect their mandates – both directly
and indirectly.
To support these policy conclusions, let me set the context.
Rising risks and the cost of inaction
The world is facing rapidly deteriorating climate and weather conditions. Global efforts
to mitigate emissions are faltering, while the frequency and severity of extreme events
are growing at an alarming rate. What is particularly concerning is that, every year
estimates are made about the frequency and severity of extreme weather events over
the next 30 years, only for us to realise a year later that the actual impacts have been
underestimated.
Meanwhile, the cost of inaction is rising. Between 1997 and 2006, the average annual
economic cost of global extreme weather events was US$45.1 billion.6 In 2024, the
economic cost of extreme climate events reached US$417 billion.7
Less mitigation requires more adaptation, yet the funding gaps for adaptation
measures such as flood prevention are extremely large. In its 2023 Adaptation Gap
Report, UNEP estimates the financing needs of developing countries to be
US$387 billion per year in this decade, which is significantly higher than earlier
estimates.8 Africa alone requires at least US$70 billion annually for climate adaptation,
but currently, tracked financing covers less than a quarter of this need.9
Africa’s disproportionate burden
Although Africa contributes only about 4% of global emissions, it is experiencing a
disproportionately rapid rise in temperatures and faster-than-average sea level
increases. In 2024, 11 million people across the continent were impacted by abnormal
6 Pielke, Jr., R.A et al. 2007. Catastrophe losses in the context of demographics, climate, and policies.
Conference paper: Managing the changing landscape of catastrophe risk. Available here:
https://sciencepolicy.colorado.edu/admin/publication_files/resource-2591-2008.06.pdf
7 Oxera 2004. The economic cost of extreme weather. Available here: https://iccwbo.org/wp-
content/uploads/sites/3/2024/11/2024-ICC-Oxera-The-economic-cost-of-extreme-weather-events.pdf
8 United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), Adaptation Gap Report 2023, 2 November 2023,
https://www.unep.org/resources/adaptation-gap-report-2023
9 Climate Policy Initiative (CPI) and Global Centre on Adaptation (GCA), Technical brief: Adaptation Finance
Flows to Africa – State and Future Trends, 2025, https://gca.org/wp-content/uploads/2025/09/CPI-Report-
Adaptation-Finance-Flows-to-Africa.pdf
4
rainfall,10 while the 2023/24 Southern African drought left 27 million people food
insecure.11
Without ambitious and coordinated action, such crises are likely to intensify.
There are several geographic, social and economic factors that contribute to Africa’s
heightened vulnerability to climate change. The continent’s heavy dependence on
rain-fed agriculture makes food security and livelihoods highly susceptible to shifts in
rainfall patterns.
Poverty, combined with a lack of access to financial services, makes it difficult for
people to recover from climate-related shocks. When a flood destroys a home or a
drought ruins a harvest, families often lack the savings or the insurance coverage to
rebuild their homes and their livelihoods. At around 3%, Africa’s insurance penetration
is far below global averages, leaving households, businesses and governments
dangerously exposed.12 This is made worse by governance challenges that can
prevent effective climate solutions before they even begin.
Finally, all of this is compounded by a low capacity to adapt, given that states often
lack the technology, infrastructure, funding and skills to manage all these challenges.
In many African countries, the financial sector is underdeveloped, which makes the
cost of finance high for climate-related investment projects. The average weighted cost
of capital projections for energy infrastructure in Africa is 15.6%, whereas in developed
regions such as Western Europe and the United States, the cost is approximately
5%.13
With limited fiscal space, public finance alone cannot shoulder the climate financing
burden. In this context, calls for central banks to promote climate-related financing are
justified.
But should they? Or even, can they?
Central bank direct measures
In this context, as is often the case when states are weak and resources are limited,
we see proposals for central bank intervention.
10 Africa Center for Strategic Studies, ‘Record Levels of Flooding in Africa Compounds Stress on Fragile
Countries’ 10 December 2024, https://africacenter.org/spotlight/record-levels-of-flooding-in-africa-
compounds-stress-on-fragile-countries/
11 World Food Programme, ‘Emergency: Southern Africa Drought’, 2025,
https://www.wfp.org/emergencies/southern-africa-drought
12 African Development Bank and OECD, ‘Scaling finance and investment for climate adaptation: Input paper
for the G20 Sustainable Finance Working Group’, 2025, https://g20sfwg.org/wp-
content/uploads/2025/07/Financing-climate-adaptation-ENG.PDFO_.pdf
13 Ibid
5
One such proposal is to modify inflation targeting by adding climate objectives to
central banks’ rate-setting decisions. This would be expected to lower rates in the near
term, thereby reducing the cost of finance for climate-related investment. Another
proposal is to implement ‘Green QE’, which essentially involves funding climate
projects directly off the central bank’s balance sheet and issuing own debt to do so.
In my experience, these proposals are non-starters. If you set rates too low, over time
you get inflation. If you do not deal with that inflation, people begin to doubt your
commitment to inflation targets and they start to set prices with higher inflation in mind.
If you tell everyone that you are deliberately setting rates low to finance green
interventions, that process of dismantling credibility just spirals faster. Ultimately, you
end up levying an inflation tax to fund sustainability initiatives, and that tax is both
inefficient and regressive. It is pretty much the worst option in the toolkit.
Central bank credibility has been hard won and remains potentially fragile, even in my
country where inflation targeting has been successful. In many other African countries,
this fragility is even more pronounced. Compromising it by adding climate objectives
to those of interest rate policy would effectively mean abandoning the main tool that
African central banks have to fight inflation.
And it could worsen, rather than ease, the cost of finance for climate-related
investments. How so? Because such investments are long term, and their cost of
capital is affected by long-term interest rates, not short-term instruments of monetary
policy. If a central bank keeps short-term rates too low to achieve climate goals, it risks
losing its credibility in managing inflation expectations. This would prompt people to
expect higher inflation in the future, causing an immediate rise in long-term interest
rates as lenders demand compensation.
But this does not mean central banks must be bystanders. There are choices between
the two extremes of radical, irresponsible action and turning a blind eye. Central banks
are deeply embedded in financial markets, have more financial expertise than most
parts of government, and have financial stability mandates. There is plenty of material
here for an effective climate strategy, built around three core elements: developing
capital markets, addressing insurance gaps, and increasing the resilience of the
financial sector.
Developing capital markets and carbon markets
Deep and liquid capital markets are essential for mobilising climate finance.
Unfortunately, many African capital markets are still in their infancy. Two of the most
important drivers of capital market development are macroeconomic stability and
effective regulation. Here, central banks can play a strong and critical role.
Often, the best financial sector policy is simply to get monetary and fiscal policy right.
A stable price environment protects savings, drives investment, lowers interest rates,
and enhances international competitiveness. It also provides the necessary flexibility
for a central bank to counter financial and economic shocks, and ensures that capital
markets can allocate funding to its most productive uses.
6
An equally important determinant of macroeconomic stability is fiscal sustainability,
which ultimately means avoiding levels of sovereign borrowing that would lead to debt
crises.
The International Monetary Fund classifies seven countries in Africa as being in debt
distress as of March this year.14 A couple of countries have also applied for debt
restructuring under the G20 Common Framework. If we want more developed capital
markets in Africa, we need to improve fiscal policymaking. We also need faster debt
restructuring processes that enable countries to rebuild their finances and their
economies quickly if a debt crisis occurs. Despite significant progress being made over
the past couple of years, the restructuring process remains slow.15
Turning to the regulatory environment, we need clear and consistent rules for how
companies report their climate risks and plans.
This means all companies – financial or otherwise – must disclose their climate
vulnerabilities and their strategies to manage them using a standardised format. This
will create comparable data, allowing investors to see which firms are truly prepared
for climate change and to fund them accordingly.
Without reliable information, markets cannot price risk, regulators cannot anticipate
vulnerabilities, and investors cannot channel financing towards the sectors most
critical for both mitigating carbon emissions and adapting to the effects of physical
risks.
In its recent input paper to the G20 Sustainable Finance Working Group, the Network
for Greening the Financial System identifies the following five pillars for integrating
adaptation considerations into transition plans16:
1. Setting up appropriate governance mechanisms to track progress against
adaptation targets.
2. Setting objectives and assessing physical risks and opportunities.
3. Responding to the identified risks and opportunities by managing actions and
adjusting business strategies.
4. Developing appropriate engagement strategies.
5. Developing appropriate measures and targets and continually improving them.
Central banks and regulators are responsible for embedding these pillars in the
decision-making and operational models of financial firms. However, these will only be
14 International Monetary Fund (IMF), ‘List of LIC DSAs for PRGT-Eligible Countries as of March 31, 2025’,
https://www.imf.org/external/Pubs/ft/dsa/DSAlist.pdf
15 World Bank Group, ‘The Global Sovereign Debt Roundtable (GSDR)’, 14 February 2025,
https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/debt/brief/the-global-sovereign-debt-roundtable-gsdr
16 Network for Greening the Financial System, ‘Integrating adaptation and resilience into transition plans’,
July 2025, https://g20sfwg.org/wp-content/uploads/2025/07/SFWG-P2a_Adaptation-and-Transition-Plans-
2.pdf
7
effective if governments ensure that non-financial firms also report on physical risks,
again highlighting the importance of policy coordination.
Carbon markets
Developing carbon markets is another crucial part of advancing Africa's capital
markets. They markets offer significant value to a country's green agenda and can
provide governments with new revenue through the regulated sale of carbon permits.
Carbon markets are being established worldwide. While the largest systems are in the
European Union and China, we are also seeing the development of smaller regional
markets. At present, the African continent accounts for just 16% of the global carbon
market.17
Developing effective carbon markets depends on international cooperation to ensure
both environmental and financial integrity. Global bodies such as the International
Organization of Securities Commissions are supporting this by establishing best
practices. Building on this momentum, through South Africa's G20 Presidency, we are
leading efforts to improve carbon credit data – a crucial step towards building
transparent and trustworthy markets.
For Africa's carbon market to grow, the major economies must allow their largest
emitters to buy more carbon credits from the continent. This demand would not only
build the market itself, but also generate crucial funding for development projects on
the continent.
Given their central role in financial markets, central banks are well positioned to help
develop carbon credit markets.
Insurance markets
Another important focus area for financial sector policy should be improving insurance
coverage in Africa. Insurance penetration rates on the continent are far below the
global average, leaving the continent more exposed to climate risk losses.18 Insurance
is also important for investment, as lenders often make insurance coverage a
prerequisite for funding.
Unfortunately – and this is another priority area for our G20 Presidency – insurance
gaps are widening.
It is becoming increasingly difficult globally to insure against natural disasters, with the
problem being especially severe in developing markets. Rising risks make insurance
17 United Nations University Institute for Natural Resources in Africa (UNU INRA), Carbon Market Economics:
Crafting a New Narrative of Opportunity and Sustainable Growth for Climate Action in Africa, 2024,
https://collections.unu.edu/eserv/UNU:10036/Carbon_Market_Economies_____Nov_2024__Web_.pdf
18 Deloitte Africa Insurance Outlook 2024/25. Available here:
https://www.deloitte.com/za/en/Industries/insurance/perspectives/africa-insurance-outlook-2024-2025.html
8
more expensive, which further widens the coverage gap. People in developing
economies often do not buy insurance due to low incomes, limited access, a lack of
risk awareness, and mistrust in financial products. Local insurance companies are
often held back by underdeveloped markets, limited technical skills, and a lack of
quality data needed to accurately price their products.19
Yet, there are already practical examples of how insurance gaps can be addressed,
despite these constraints. For instance, in Senegal, the government has established
an agricultural insurance company that is 45% government owned and 55% privately
owned. This insurance company offers various insurance products to farmers,
including parametric insurance against drought – a simple system that pays out when
certain conditions are met, such as soil moisture levels being above or below a specific
threshold. Policies taken by farmers through the insurance company are subsided by
the government. This is a powerful example of how shared responsibility and policy
coordination can strengthen resilience.20 Of course, it relies on the fiscal strength I
mentioned previously.
Just as with capital markets, developing new and affordable insurance products and
markets depends on effective collaboration between a wide range of partners. These
groups – including the public sector, insurers, consumer groups, and international
development institutions – all have distinct but complementary roles. Their
collaboration is crucial for assessing gaps in insurance coverage, improving the quality
of risk data, building consumer confidence, and strengthening financial literacy and
risk awareness.
Increasing the resilience of the financial system to climate risks
Lastly, let me reflect on how we can increase the resilience of the financial system to
climate risks. It will be impossible to develop capital markets and address insurance
protection gaps unless the financial system is resilient to climate change shocks.
Although I have mainly highlighted the unique challenges Africa faces, building a
resilient financial system also requires us to adopt best practices from other central
banks and financial regulators. This includes establishing appropriate disclosure
requirements, carrying out stress tests, and integrating climate considerations into the
operational and governance frameworks of financial institutions. But there are some
caveats to consider.
19 African Development Bank and OECD, ‘Scaling finance and investment for climate adaptation: Input paper
for the G20 Sustainable Finance Working Group’ 2025, https://g20sfwg.org/wp- /uploads/2025/07/Financing-
climate-adaptation-ENG.PDFO_.pdf
20 Network for Greening the Financial System, ‘Integrating adaptation and resilience into transition plans’, July
2025, https://g20sfwg.org/wp-content/uploads/2025/07/SFWG-P2a_Adaptation-and-Transition-Plans-2.pdf
9
For example, African countries have unique constraints that must be addressed in the
formulation of disclosure policy. Voluntary disclosures should come first to allow
corporations to understand their data and capacity requirements and address these
during the voluntary disclosure phase. Once data and capacity have been addressed,
these climate-related disclosures should become mandatory and form part of our
financial system’s resilience infrastructure.
A one-size-fits-all approach to climate stress testing will not work for Africa. Standard
tests focus on corporate loans, but our banks' main risk is in the retail sector. These
tests also fail to capture our unique vulnerabilities, including:
• greater physical risks – we are more exposed to events such as droughts and
floods; and
• different transition risks: – we are often impacted by capital flight caused by
policy shifts in advanced economies.
As supervisors, we must design stress tests that are tailored to the challenges we face.
An area that is often not associated with the resilience of the financial system is
financial inclusion. It is however essential to how African countries manage climate-
related risks. Access to finance and insurance, as well as financial sector access,
assist households and businesses with more risk management tools and allows
governments and donors to provide assistance in the face of catastrophic events.
Finally, strengthening financial resilience in Africa through regional coordination is
essential to mitigate shared vulnerabilities and amplify collective strengths. By
harmonising regulatory frameworks, pooling resources for climate and debt-related
shocks, and enhancing cross-border financial surveillance, African countries can build
a more robust and integrated financial system.
Conclusion
So, should African central banks take on the challenges of climate change?
The answer is yes, but with limited and clearly defined parameters.
I hope I have persuaded you that proposals for central banks to finance the fight
against climate change – by weakening their commitment to low inflation and setting
rates low to make climate finance cheap – are misguided and sure to fail in their
objective. That is a big no.
What we need is to improve our modelling to inform the calibration of monetary policy
decisions.
There is also a compelling case for a strong affirmative when it comes to financial
sector stability and development. We can help develop markets to better finance
10
climate-related investment, facilitate carbon trading, and improve insurance coverage.
And we can help protect overall financial stability from the climate shocks that are
coming our way. None of this requires sacrificing core mandates or stepping outside
our area of comparative advantage. Indeed, it is closely connected to our pre-existing
work and mandates.
The core challenge for African economies is managing high exposure to climate-
related risks while having limited resources. While central banks may not be at the
forefront of the battle against climate change, our involvement remains essential.
If you take away one thing that I have said tonight, it is that we are not flying blind as
central banks. We know that there is much we do not know, and we are committed to
learning. We recognise the plausible danger of mission creep, or even mission
compromise. Where these efforts go awry and lead to inflation or financial losses, or
the crowding out of other climate responders, they set central banks up for a blame
game they cannot win.
Our core mandates remain clear and essential: safeguarding the public against
inflation is paramount. Losing sight of this priority would not only harm our citizens, but
also erode the effectiveness and independence of central banks. Therefore, we must
avoid diverging from this focus. At the same time, our active roles in promoting
financial stability and fostering market development present meaningful opportunities
for positive impact. It is in these areas – where our expertise is strongest – that we
should concentrate our efforts.
11
References
Africa Center for Strategic Studies. 2024. ‘Record Levels of Flooding in Africa
Compounds Stress on Fragile Countries’. https://africacenter.org/spotlight/record-
levels-of-flooding-in-africa-compounds-stress-on-fragile-countries/
African Development Bank and OECD. 2025. ‘Scaling finance and investment for
climate adaptation: Input paper for the G20 Sustainable Finance Working Group’.
https://g20sfwg.org/wp-content/uploads/2025/07/Financing-climate-adaptation-
ENG.PDFO_.pdf
Climate Policy Initiative (CPI) and Global Centre on Adaptation (GCA). 2025.
‘Technical brief: Adaptation Finance Flows to Africa – State and Future Trends’.
https://gca.org/wp-content/uploads/2025/09/CPI-Report-Adaptation-Finance-Flows-
to-Africa.pdf
Davies, H. 2023. ‘Central Bankers’ Green Lines’. Project Syndicate.
https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/central-banks-increasingly-divided-
over-climate-change-by-howard-davies-2023-01
Deloitte Africa Insurance Outlook 2024/25. Available here:
https://www.deloitte.com/za/en/Industries/insurance/perspectives/africa-insurance-
outlook-2024-2025.html
Forster, P et al. 2025. ‘Indicators of Global Climate Change 2024: Annual update of
key indicators of the state of the climate system and human influence’. Earth Syst. Sci.
Data, 17: 2641–2680, 2025. https://doi.org/10.5194/essd-17-2641-2025
Hansen, L P. 2022. ‘Central banking challenges posed by uncertain climate change
and natural disasters’. Journal of Monetary Economics, 125(C): 1–15.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0304393221001033
International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) and World Bank Group.
2025. ‘Identify and address insurance protection gaps’. An input paper to the G20
Sustainable Finance Working Group. https://g20sfwg.org/wp-
content/uploads/2025/07/SFWG-P2b_Insurance-Protection-Gap.pdf
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2025. ‘List of LIC DSAs for PRGT-Eligible
Countries as of March 31, 2025’. https://www.imf.org/external/Pubs/ft/dsa/DSAlist.pdf
Issing, O. 2019. ‘Central banks aren’t responsible for fighting climate change –
governments are’. World Economic Forum Stories.
https://www.weforum.org/stories/2019/12/this-is-the-problem-with-central-banks-
fighting-climate-change/
Koudalo, Y M A and Toure, M. 2023. ‘Does financial inclusion promote financial
stability? Evidence from Africa’. Cogent Economics & Finance, 11(2).
https://doi.org/10.1080/23322039.2023.2225327
12
Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS) 2025, ‘Integrating adaptation and
resilience into transition plans’. An input paper to the G20 Sustainable Finance
Working Group. https://g20sfwg.org/wp-content/uploads/2025/07/SFWG-P2a_
Adaptation-and-Transition-Plans-2.pdf
NGFS 2017, Joint statement by the Founding Members of the Central Banks and
Supervisors Network for Greening the Financial System”. Available at
https://www.ngfs.net/en/press-release/joint-statement-founding-members-central-
banks-and-supervisors-network-greening-financial-system
NGFS 2024, NGFS long-term scenarios for central banks and supervisors. Available
here: https://www.ngfs.net/ngfs-scenarios-portal/
Oxera. 2004. ‘The economic cost of extreme weather’. https://iccwbo.org/wp-
content/uploads/sites/3/2024/11/2024-ICC-Oxera-The-economic-cost-of-extreme-
weather-events.pdf
Pielke, Jr., R.A et al. 2007. ‘Catastrophe losses in the context of demographics,
climate, and policies’. Conference paper: Managing the changing landscape of
catastrophe risk. https://sciencepolicy.colorado.edu/admin/publication_files/resource-
2591-2008.06.pdf
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). 2023. The Adaptation Gap Report.
https://www.unep.org/resources/adaptation-gap-report-2023
United Nations University Institute for Natural Resources in Africa. 2024. ‘Carbon
Market Economics: Crafting a New Narrative of Opportunity and Sustainable Growth
for Climate Action in Africa’.
https://collections.unu.edu/eserv/UNU:10036/Carbon_Market_Economies_____Nov_
2024__Web_.pdf
World Bank Group. 2025. ‘The Global Sovereign Debt Roundtable’.
https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/debt/brief/the-global-sovereign-debt-roundtable-
gsdr
World Food Programme. 2025. ‘Emergency: Southern Africa Drought’.
https://www.wfp.org/emergencies/southern-africa-drought
13